Archaeologists Find Deformed Dog Buried Near Ancient Child In The Philippines000In several pre-Spanish Colonial period graves in Manila, archaeologists have found the remains of domesticated dogs dating to the 12th-15th centuries AD. One particular dog, found buried next to a child, showcased spinal deformities that suggest this was a cherished animal.In the 1960s, archaeological excavation in Manila within the district of Santa Ana revealed over 300 graves dating to the so-called protohistoric period prior to Spanish colonization. Dog skeletons were also found during this excavation, but were not recorded as meticulously as were the human remains. Grave number 120, however, appeared to have held both a child and a dog. At the time, archaeologists concluded that early Filipinos perceived animal companionship to be important in the afterlife.A new analysis of the canine remains from Santa Ana has just been published in the International Journal of Osteoarchaeology by Timothy Vitales of the National Museum of the Philippines. Vitales found that all five dogs he was able to examine were consistent with domesticated animals, although only three of the dogs had relatively complete skeletons. While he could not determine breed from the remains, Vitales found that the measurements of the ancient canines were in line with those of modern Philippine dogs known as askal or aspin.Why these dogs were buried in a human cemetery was a puzzle, though. Vitales notes the absence of butchery and burn marks, meaning the dogs were not food. Rather, their location and completeness "suggest that these dogs were deposited as burials."The importance of dogs can be seen in ethnohistorical accounts. Vitales writes that, for example, "hounds were given particular importance within the Tagalog community." They accompanied their masters everywhere and, in hunting, were "well-trained in following orders when it comes to attacking their prey. The special treatment Tagalogs give to these dogs may have extended even at their death."One dog at the Santa Ana burial site is thought to support the interpretation of canine involvement in the human death ritual. This animal was found very close to the skeleton of a child and originally interpreted as an animal companion.In reanalyzing the excavation records, though, Vitales found that the dog skeleton was actually 10cm lower than the child, and oriented very differently. This would mean the dog and the child burials were not made at the same time. Rather, Vitales notes that "the dog was buried as an individual being."If the dog near the child's grave was not an animal companion, what merited it a purposeful burial? Vitales thinks that the dog's skeleton reveals clues to its life. Specifically, there are malformations on the dog's spine, particularly in the lower back.Understanding the cause of the dog's spinal deformity is not straightforward. Vitales suggests that it could be related to an infection or a spinal issue like scoliosis. Another cause, though, would be stress placed on the back -- such as in using the dog as a load-carrier or for transportation purposes. If this pup was employed in a weight-bearing activity, its death may have been met with sadness and it may have been given a burial.Although Vitales cannot be certain about the reason for the dogs' presence among humans, he concludes that "the fact that these dogs were buried as individuals in a cemetery in close association with people implies the social and cultural significance of these animals to human societies, which are further supported by the ethnographic and ethnohistorical data." His study, he hopes, "may provide further insights on the life history and usage of the dogs in the region and their relationship with people in the past."