Skeleton Reveals 19th Century Peoria Woman Had Chronic UTIs000Calcified kidney stones are rarely found in excavations of ancient skeletons, as they are small and easily missed, but when multiple large masses were discovered near the lower back of a woman buried in a 19th century Peoria cemetery, researchers sought to fully analyze them.The Peoria City Cemetery in Illinois was in use between about 1839 and 1886. When archaeologists excavated it in 2009, they found 86 people of both sexes, all ages, and different socioeconomic statuses. One particular skeleton, female and in her 20s at death, had calcified masses next to her lower thoracic and upper lumbar vertebrae that were strongly suggestive of kidney stones.In a new article in the International Journal of Paleopathology, anthropologist Thomas Jaskowiec and colleagues note the need to investigate kidney disease in the past by "determining the chemical composition of the staghorn masses using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, and by comparing the results to clinical data as a means of evaluating their etiology."Specifically, the most common types of kidney stones are calcium, magnesium ammonium phosphate (also called struvite), and uric acid. Calcium stones are the most common, and also most frequently found in men. Uric acid stones are generally associated with gout caused by diets high in animal protein and genetic factors. And struvite stones tend to be associated with urinary tract infections and are much more common in women; they are also extremely difficult or impossible to pass. Interestingly, struvite stones sometimes include bacteria inside the stone itself.Jaskowiec and colleagues examined the calcifications from the pelvis and found an FTIR signature compatible with a struvite stone. Additionally, they discovered urea in their analysis, which "strongly suggests that the stones are uroliths," they conclude, "and are not from or associated with the soil matrix surrounding the skeleton."Further, the researchers note that "determining that the stones from BF 219 are staghorn struvite uroliths offers insight into the health of this individual." Specifically, this type of stone is "predominantly associated with prolonged urinary tract infection in women." With limited means of medical intervention in the 19th century, it's highly likely this woman perished because of sepsis or renal failure due to recurrent UTIs.Since few comparative examples of kidney stones exist from archaeological sites, Jaskowiec and colleagues hope that their study will inspire other anthropologists to further investigate renal issues in the past. Studying these ancient and historic stones may even shed light on contemporary medical problems, such as why the prevalence of kidney stones in the US more than doubled between the mid and late 20th century.