Skeletons Of Executed Immigrants Found In Neolithic Mass Grave In Germany, Archaeologists Report000Neolithic farming culture seven millennia ago may seem like a peaceful paleo society, but growing archaeological evidence, including a newly discovered mass grave of skeletons in Germany, has revealed the systematic execution of immigrants in this time period.Writing this week in Nature Communications, bioarchaeologist Christian Meyer of OsteoARC and a team of colleagues report on a curious burial discovered in 2013 during construction of a housing development in Halberstadt, Germany. The grave produced nine skeletons and was found in an area with a known Neolithic settlement attributed to the so-called Linearbandkeramik (LBK) culture of 5500-4900 BC.The LBK culture represents for archaeologists the first full-time farmers in central Europe, when people from southeastern Europe spread north and west, bringing their farming techniques with them, but also bringing the idea of clearing forests and establishing permanent settlements and farming plots. These people get their German name Linearbandkeramik not from historical records but from the type of pottery associated with them: globe-shaped pots with incised lines. Until fairly recently, LBK culture was largely known from settlements and pottery remains. But new analyses of skeletal remains have shown a whole different - and violent - side to the culture.While typical LBK burial practices include inhumation of individuals and occasional cremations, the find at Halberstadt is quite different. Meyer and his colleagues discovered that the nine people in the grave included seven adult males, one probably adolescent male, and one young adult female. The team found no grave goods, and the skeletons were positioned wildly, as if just tossed there, suggesting a nefarious end.In analyzing the trauma to the skeletons, Meyer and colleagues found at least one blunt force injury to the back of the head of each of the seven individuals whose skulls were preserved. One skeleton had at least two cranial injuries, while another had at least five. All were made around the time of death and were almost certainly the cause of these people's demise.To further investigate who these victims of violence were, Meyer and his team subjected the teeth and bones of six of the skeletons to isotope analysis. The strontium isotope results revealed that five of the six people grew up outside of the region of Halberstadt, having immigrated there some time before their deaths, and the carbon and nitrogen isotopes confirmed far different diets than what the locals, who were buried normally at the site, had been eating.Results from the Halberstadt mass grave are intriguing, as the data are helping build a case for a thorough reexamination of LBK and Early Neolithic culture in Europe, particularly regarding the cause and role of violence. There is increasing "skeletal evidence for perimortem collective lethal violence" in the LBK culture, Meyer and colleagues write, "as well as possible torture, mutilation, dismemberment, and cannibalism" at this and other European sites such as Herxheim, Germany.Halberstadt is somewhat different from these other sites, though. The researchers explain that the demography is very interesting -- this site actually lacks the skeletons of children, who "are actually numerous throughout the known examples of massacres and ritual dismemberment" in the Early Neolithic. "The obvious dominance of younger adult males [at Halberstadt] is equally striking," they note, which may be related to a potential attack situation. "The killed men can be regarded as non-locals, origination from outside the regular marriage networks and/or recruitment areas of the Halberstadt LBK community," the archaeologists conclude. In short, the mass grave occupants appear to have been immigrants who were slaughtered by the locals."Why this violence occurred is of course largely unknown, and we can only speculate about that," Meyer told me by email. However, the date range of these massacre sites may hold a clue: climate change. "Adverse climatic conditions are often cited, and other bioarchaeology research has shown that climate can heavily influence human behavior and can lead to violent outbreaks," he notes. Since the Early Neolithic boasted the highest population density up to that date, Meyer hypothesizes that it could have led to "an atmosphere of societal tension -- 'us' vs. 'others' -- that may have erupted into instances of warfare." Yet over time, people adapted and the climate changed, so Meyer emphasizes that "these outbreaks of collective violence were not inevitable, as societies are sometimes able to absorb and buffer worsening outside conditions. Everything is of course much more complex than it appears, especially in the very patchy archaeological record."Further work is planned at Halberstadt, including DNA analysis that Meyer tells me "will be integrated into the further analysis of this specific site and larger projects about the overall prehistoric population history and development of Central Europe." Combining this research with other DNA studies, such as the recently published analysis of the Y-chromosome bottleneck in the Neolithic period, should lead archaeologists to better understand how people moved around Eurasia following the key human development of agriculture.Meyer and colleagues conclude their paper by noting that "the controlled and sometimes public killing of individuals or groups carries a serious message about who wields power over life and death." At Neolithic Halberstadt, the clear evidence for a form of ethnocide that they have found in the "systematic killing of a selected group of non-local people" reveals new information about ancient culture wars.