This Napoleonic Soldier Survived For Two Months With Horrific Facial Wound Following 1812 Battle000A mass grave in Russia dating to the 1812 invasion by Napoleon's Grande Armée has revealed that one soldier, who suffered a horrific facial wound during combat, may have survived for two months before succumbing to his injuries. A 3D study of the skeleton is providing new information on both his injury and what he looked like prior to receiving it.Writing in a research paper recently accepted by the International Journal of Osteoarchaeology, an international team of researchers based in France, Russia, Canada, and Germany detail the saber-inflicted trauma suffered by a Napoleonic soldier who was buried in a mass grave in Kaliningrad. The capital of Eastern Prussia at the time, this city was one of the places where the survivors of Napoleon's disastrous Russian invasion rested in late December 1812.The mass grave was discovered in 2006 during real estate development in Kaliningrad and was excavated by the Institute of Archaeology at the Russian Academy of Sciences. A dozen other mass graves containing a total of about 600 people are also known from this area.Military buttons, clothing, shoes, boots, and coins all suggested the dead were Napoleonic soldiers of the Grande Armée, and the bones were originally studied by archaeologists from the French-Russian Joint Laboratory LIA K181. Around 1 in 6 skeletons revealed violent trauma such as weapon wounds and amputations. One particular skeleton, however, had a serious wound to his lower face and jaw, as well as evidence that he lived for a short time after being gravely wounded.Skeleton C2 from the Kaliningrad mass grave is the focus of the new study, led by Dany Coutinho Nogueira of PSL Research University in Paris, France. The skeleton was identified as a young man in his early 20s when he died. Immediately evident on his skull was a violent injury that fractured the left side of his mandible, his maxillary bones, and his front teeth.The team applied a number of non-destructive technologies to the skull to better understand the soldier's injury and death. CT scanning clearly showed the new bone growth that suggested the man lived between 6 weeks and 3 months after sustaining the facial wound.Using 3D software, the team digitally removed the fracture callus -- or the healed portions of the injury -- and identified small fragments of bone that had been displaced within the man's jaw by the injury. Essentially, 21st century digital technology allowed them to virtually dissect the skull and reconstruct what it looked like prior to the wound and subsequent healing.To reconstruct the soldier's face prior to injury, the team used mirror-imaging of his own bones where possible. For sections where that was impossible, such as his maxilla, they employed data from modern French men of similar age and body size."These 3D reconstruction and restoration processes of the mandible and maxilla allowed us to obtain a virtual complete skull," the researchers write. While the software "provides a neutral facial model, upon completion of this procedure, the resulting facial approximation was further enhanced with the addition of realistic pigmentation and texture details using Blender software."In addition to reconstructing the soldier's face, the team was also able to figure out the mechanism of injury. "The presence of sharp force trauma excludes a simple accidental cause," they note. "The victim was probably wounded during a fight against Russian troops. The most probable weapon that produces this type of trauma is the heavy saber used by cavalry of the period." Given the location of the facial fractures, they further hypothesize that "the maxilla was the area of initial impact. Secondarily, the loss of velocity and energy caused by striking the maxilla produced a major fracture of the right mandibular corpus." The soldier may have been mounted on a horse at the time of his injury, as "the force of the blow would be increased by the speed at which two mounted soldiers would clash."It is likely the blow was delivered by a right-handed assailant who was on the left side of the soldier. "In this case, the lesion would correspond to a saber blow of the taille, the blade of the sword, causing extensive but superficial cuts." The wound was therefore severe but not immediately lethal.The healing of the wound suggests the soldier may have been treated in a French military hospital in Kaliningrad, as the mass grave in which he was found is located close to a known Napoleonic era hospital. He then died somewhat later, perhaps from a cause related to the wound such as an infection or perhaps from typhus or trench fever, which were both rampant at that time.This brief study of a 19th century skull using 21st century technologies demonstrates just how much archaeologists can learn about the past using non-destructive methods. Coutinho Nogueira and colleagues' analysis reveals the horrors of war and the effects on the lives and bodies of young men in the past.Although this man's name is not known, they are confident that "more than two centuries after his death, this facial reconstruction brings this unknown soldier’s face back to the present."