Skeletons From Killing Fields Remind Visitors That Violence Is Not Easily Erased000Under the infamous dictator Pol Pot, leader of the Khmer Rouge regime, over two million Cambodians died from violence, overwork, malnutrition, and mistreatment in the late 1970s. More than one million victims of this genocide, which lasted until Vietnam toppled the regime in 1979, were buried in the so-called Killing Fields. Today, a fraction of those human remains are enshrined at the Choeung Ek Genocidal Center in Phnom Penh, and one forensic anthropologist has studied them in an effort to correlate historical records with skeletal evidence of violence.Julie Fleischman's PhD dissertation at Michigan State University includes a detailed analysis of the available skeletons, as well as interviews with the descendant community, in an effort to uncover what happened to these Cambodians and how the new generation has come to an understanding of the genocide of their relatives.Working at the Choeung Ek Genocidal Center, Fleischman pored over more than 500 skulls, finding that 83% of them were from men and all were of Asian ancestry. Most people were also young, between the ages of 20 and 35, but she did find children and elderly individuals.In an analysis of the traumatic injuries evident on the skulls, Fleischman found that more than 60% suffered violence at the time of death, mostly as a result of blunt force trauma to the bottom of the head. This suggests a form of execution in which the victim was struck on the back of the head or neck by a blunt object. Fleischman found no differences in the manner of execution for males or females, or for young or old people; however, historical reports suggest that infants were beaten against trees.Fleischman's work also compared the ghoulish 'execution lists' kept by the Khmer Rouge with the available skeletal remains. "Many of the 20th century's violent atrocities have received detailed forensic analysis, but until recently, the victims of the Khmer Rouge had not," she tells me. "My research shows how anthropological science can corroborate or refute the historical narrative of violence." Comparing the physical evidence on the human remains to reports from the time had never been done on this scale before.Using records from the Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum, Fleischman also examined nearly one hundred execution lists containing the names of 6,285 victims in an effort to see whether the demographics of the skeletons matched with the lists. As with the skeletons, the majority of people on the list were male (82%), with an average age at death around 30.To make her research truly both biological and cultural, Fleischman spoke to Cambodians, many the descendants of genocide victims. "I wanted to understand how Cambodians felt about having human remains displayed throughout the country," she tells me. "I wanted to know if they felt this was acceptable, appropriate, and helpful, as ancestor worship is a prominent component of Theravada Buddhism, the primary religion in Cambodia." On the other hand, Fleischman wondered if perhaps they were indifferent to the bones, as more than four decades had passed."Many of the people I spoke with told me that the human remains are meant to be viewed, remembered, and used as tools to teach the younger generations about their history," Fleischman explains. "But the bones are also cared for, visited, and incorporated into modern Cambodian life because they are ancestors." Commemoration of the victims of this genocide is both important and ongoing, and in places in which the bones are on display, they function to illustrate the toll that political violence can take on a culture.Since 1997, the Extraordinary Chambers in the Council of Cambodia (ECCC) has been trying Khmer Rouge members under Cambodian and international law in order to provide justice to the victims of the regime. Survivors have a direct voice in court as civil parties, but skeletal evidence from places like Choeung Ek was used sparingly in these trials, in spite of the abundance of remains that exist. Under the ECCC, Nuon Chea, the right-hand man of Pol Pot, was convicted for crimes against humanity in 2014. Fleischman thinks these trials are importance "since they demonstrate that mass violence and genocide should not be forgotten. The lesson of the ECCC is that perpetrators of violence are not exempt from prosecution despite the passage of time."Fleischman's important work on the victims of the Khmer Rouge reminds us that genocide is not a feature of our distant human past. In addressing the social impact of the human remains, she contends that this period was devastating. However, "the human remains of the victims have not been forgotten," she writes. "The remains continue to remind all who visit that immeasurable violence occurred in Cambodia but also that Cambodians are resilient and they will continue to memorialize those they lost."