Skeletons From Napoleonic Battlefield Shed Light On Soldiers' Health000The Battle of Aspern, which took place in Austria during the Napoleonic Wars, claimed the lives of tens of thousands of soldiers, many of whom were buried directly on the battlefield to prevent the spread of epidemic disease. New research on their skeletons is revealing information not only about the horrors of war but also about their childhood health.Writing in this month's International Journal of Paleopathology, archaeologists Leslie Quade and Michaela Binder of the Austrian Archaeological Institute in Vienna detail their analysis of the bones of 30 soldiers who died in the May 1809 battle, in which about 77,000 French soldiers led by Napoleon were up against nearly 90,000 Austrian soldiers. Napoleon's army was forced to retreat, and historical reports suggest that about 7,000 soldiers were buried where they fell, some in mass graves and some individually.Quade and Binder examined the 30 skeletons and found that all were male and the vast majority were between 18-35 years of age. Their research question focused on the hypothesis that these conscripts had healthy childhoods, because historical sources suggest that the men had to meet minimum health requirements. The soldiers' health, however, likely deteriorated after they joined the military. "Letters, memoirs, and personal accounts from 19th century soldiers," the archaeologists note in their article, "attest to difficult living conditions in the military, which included marching long distances while carrying heavy supplies, sleeping outdoors regardless of climate, and the generally poor quantity and quality of available food."To test their hypothesis, Quade and Binder looked for evidence of childhood health and disease. They discovered, based on the length of the thigh bones, that the Aspern soldiers were fairly tall compared to other people who lived during this time period, suggesting good nutrition in childhood. However, nearly half of them had a condition called dental enamel hypoplasia, a change in the growth of the teeth owing to environmental or metabolic stress in childhood. The presence of these enamel defects means that "although soldiers may have been tall, their childhoods were not as uniformly free from physical stressors as previously considered," the authors write.Skeletons can also provide information about the men's health as adults. Quade and Binder found that one-quarter of the soldiers they examined suffered sinus infections and about one-fifth of them had lung inflammations, likely due to exposure to "gun powder, smoke from tobacco or fires for warmth and light, fires in battle, and the smoke generated from muskets and artillery." Evidence of the physical demands of military life was also found on several soldiers' skeletons, most notably in the form of "march foot" -- stress fractures of the metatarsals that result from repeated use in marching."By looking at health during childhood and adulthood," Quade tells me, "we not only get a better understanding of the men who became soldiers but also see what impact military life had on these individuals." More specifically, Binder says that "military life was detrimental to the health of the soldiers, and we shouldn't think of glowing heroes marching into battle -- rather, these were often sick young men with broken bodies."Historical understandings of Napoleonic soldiers, therefore, are complicated by this new study. Even if the preference for new recruits was for tall, healthy young men, skeletal studies such as these reveal a more varied childhood in which malnutrition, disease, and environmental issues affected their growing bodies."Bioarchaeology has an important responsibility," Binder concludes, "to document and tell the stories of these men otherwise forgotten by history, and to remind us of the hardships suffered by millions of men. These soldiers lay the basis for shaping the world the way it is today."