Archaeologists Study Medieval Mass Graves In Latvia For Evidence Of Plague And Famine000The turn of the 17th century was a particularly stressful time for the people of Riga, Latvia, as famine and plague rocked the small town, resulting in mass graves. Archaeologists have recently studied skeletons recovered from these graves to learn more about the lives and deaths of Medieval people in Eastern Europe.Writing this month in PLoS ONE, a team of archaeologists from Durham University in the UK and the Institute of Latvian History detail their study of hundreds of skeletons from the St. Gertrude Church cemetery, which dates to the 15th to 17th centuries. The village population of Gertrude was reasonably wealthy, but the people who lived in the city of Old Riga were less so. Two mass graves were found in this cemetery, along with a burial pit, and a number of more traditional, individual graves.The people interred in the mass graves, according to historical records found by Elina Petersone-Gordina and her colleagues, "could have been either the victims of an epidemic or rural immigrants who came to Riga during a devastating famine." In the winter of 1601-1602, poor immigrants from the rural countryside came to Riga in search of food. They were turned away, however, and forced to camp outside the city walls near the church of St. Gertrude; many of them died of starvation or hypothermia. There are also two known plague epidemics in Riga at this time - in 1601 and 1623 - so occupants of the mass graves may be plague victims. Both mass graves were substantial, with one holding 166 people and the other 120.In order to learn more about the deaths of the people of Medieval Riga, the researchers studied their teeth for evidence of diet and disease. Looking at the wear on the molars revealed that the people buried in the mass graves had been eating a coarser diet than the people buried in the traditional graves, and Petersone-Gordina and colleagues infer that the mass grave occupants had likely eaten bread that had a high proportion of bran in it. The differences in rates of dental disease in the mass graves and general cemetery further suggest that there may have been three different groups of people eating three different diets.Although the dental diseases varied, the researchers found no major differences in diet based on biochemical analysis of the bones. There appears to have been some variation in the types or quantities of carbohydrates that each group ate, but no differences in protein consumption. Petersone-Gordina and colleagues conclude that "all groups had equal access to marine fish and/or other marine protein, but it was accessed differentially among individuals, without clear evidence for any pattern by context and/or sex groups."In order to better understand the people buried at St. Gertrude Church cemetery, the researchers propose further testing to be carried out in the future. Specifically, strontium isotope analysis may help them identify whether one of the groups is composed of immigrants. That information may solve the historical question of what effects the famine and plague of 1601 had on the Medieval population of Latvia.