Two Dozen People Massacred At Ancient Swedish Fort, Archaeologists Report000The ringfort at Sandby borg on the narrow island of Öland off the coast of Sweden recently revealed more than two dozen human and animal remains from a massacre that took place in the late 5th century AD. Archaeologists are beginning to conclude that the Migration Period in Scandinavia was politically, economically, and socially unstable, which appears to have led to violence.The Sandby borg ringfort consists of an oval-shaped wall enclosing more than 50 houses, located along the shoreline of Öland. These sorts of ringforts and houses, along with cemeteries and graves, were quite common in the area during the Migration Period (400-550 AD). Since excavations began in 2011, two houses have been fully excavated, half of a third house was uncovered, and 6 additional houses were subject to limited excavation. Still, in spite of the small amount of the overall site that has been uncovered, the large number of human remains and artifacts speak to a violent end to the settlement.Writing today in the journal Antiquity, archaeologist Clara Alfsdotter and colleagues note that, "the context of the skeletal remains is unusual. Animal and human skeletons were found articulated and disarticulated on the floors of houses and on the streets." In one house, 9 people were found: three male adults, two adults who were likely male as well, as well as a young child and an infant. Several of the skulls reveal evidence of blunt force trauma to the back or side of the head, and an adolescent appears to have fallen dead on top of the legs of an adult who was already deceased. "Two of the human skeletons in house 40 were partially charred and disarticulated," the researcher write, suggesting "that raiders attempted to set some houses on fire, or that a fire broke out by accident.""The trauma evident on several skulls, on one man’s shoulder, and one man’s hip resulted from blows aimed at the back or the side of the bodies," they conclude. "Perimortem damage resembling common battle injuries, such as parry fractures or facial trauma—both typically produced when facing an opponent—has so far not been identified. This pattern leads us to conclude that the perpetrators comprised a large number of people, striking simultaneously in several houses, and that several of the victims were not in a position to defend themselves."Interestingly, of the adults whose sex could be estimated, the archaeologists found only males and no females. It is therefore possible that the deathly violence was directed at the men (and some children) while either sparing the women or taking them hostage. The lack of burial of the people in a mass grave further suggests that no one ever came back to the ringfort.An additional oddity about Sandby borg is the lack of military equipment and weapons, which would typically have been kept to fortify a ringfort such as this. Alfsdotter and colleagues suggest that the raiders, whoever they were, may have taken the weapons for themselves or deposited them ritually in a lake or a marsh, as several of these sorts of collections have been found in the past.The reason that Sandby borg was targeted for this massacre is not clear from the archaeological evidence. This was a time when the collapse of the Roman Empire was making waves even as far north as Scandinavia, and the result was the abandonment and destruction of farmsteads during the Migration Period. Whether Sandby borg was a casualty of tumultous political times, as different groups jockeyed to top the social hierarchy, or simply a case of being in the wrong place at the wrong time, it's possible that future archaeological work at the site will further reveal what life was like in ancient Scandinavia.