Tiny Mummified Girl Not An Alien, May Be Result Of Fatal Birth Defects000In 2003, a 6-inch-long partially mummified body was found in the Atacama Desert in Chile. After a decade of speculation about whether it was evidence of aliens, "Ata" was subjected to DNA testing -- and found to be human. A new analysis published today in the journal Genome Research goes into depth about the mutations possibly linked to bone diseases found in the tiny mummy.Some of Ata's physical anomalies were outlined in a 2013 Science Magazine article, in which Stanford University researcher Garry Nolan found that the specimen appeared to have only 10 pairs of ribs, rather than the normal human 12. Nolan and colleagues offered to analyze its DNA after seeing a documentary on the specimen that purported to prove it was evidence of alien life on Earth. They discovered, however, that Ata was a human female, not an alien, and genetically related to South American populations.Using advanced genomic DNA analysis, Bhattacharya and colleagues report a number of new insights into Ata in Genome Research. First, based on a DNA-decay model, the researchers were able to show that Ata "is consistent with a sample younger than 500 yr."Another bit of evidence for Ata's more recent demise is the researchers' genetic ancestry assessment. They discovered that she is closely related to the Chilean Chilote population, a people who were conquered by the Spanish in the 16th century. She was also found to be admixed with European and East Asian populations, which is consistent, the researchers write, "with the ancestry estimations in Chilean individuals based on migration events in pre- and post-colonial periods."It is curious that carbon-14 analysis was not performed in an attempt to resolve the antiquity of the sample and perhaps place it within a specific time period or culture of prehistoric or early historic Chile. With an age of the last half millennium, though, this new age of the specimen at least demonstrates that Ata is too recent to be a Chinchorro mummy.The whole-genome sequencing of Ata revealed a number of potential conditions, or rather mutations "previously linked with diseases of small stature, rib anomalies, cranial malformations, premature joint fusion, and skeletal dysplasia," Bhattacharya and colleagues note. The researchers suggest that a condition such as "Greenberg skeletal dysplasia" can "produce phenotypes similar to that observed in the Ata specimen." That particular syndrome is very rare and fatal before birth."Given the size of the specimen and the severity of the mutations described, it seems likely the specimen was a preterm birth," they conclude. It is unclear in the literature how the skeleton was originally assessed at years older than this, but it appears to have resulted from a combination of lack of access to the specimen and lack of analysis by a bioarchaeologist trained in estimating age-at-death from ancient skeletal remains.So Ata has been confirmed to be a human female, and likely either died at birth or was a preterm miscarriage. Bhattacharya and colleagues further suggest that, since Ata was found in La Noria, "one of the Atacama Desert's many abandoned mining towns," this could suggest "a possible role for prenatal nitrate exposure leading to DNA damage."Ata is therefore not an alien, but may have been a sad result of fatal birth defects and contaminated drinking water in the driest desert in the world.At the present time, it appears that Ata is in the collection of Barcelona entrepreneur Ramon Navi-Osorio, who also leads the Institute for Exobiological Investigation and Study, a UFO organization. Navi-Osorio has written extensively on Ata (such as here in Spanish), summarizing several professionals' opinions that this is a recent human fetus but also engaging the public in a documentary that exaggerates Ata's physical mutations into a story of possible extraterrestrial origins.Now that genomic DNA work has been concluded, I can only hope that Navi-Osorio will return Ata to the graveyard in La Noria where she belongs.