International Experts Refute Alien Mummy Analysis, Question Ethics And Legality000In March of this year, a group of geneticists published a study in Genome Research on a small, 'alien'-like mummy nicknamed Ata, found in the Atacama Desert of Chile in 2003. While those researchers suggested that novel mutations might be responsible for the mummy's seemingly odd anatomical characteristics, an international team of experts has now refuted those results and questioned the ethical and legal implications of the DNA analysis.As soon as the Genome Research paper was published and attracted media attention, experts on the human body -- with specific expertise in developmental fetal osteology and archaeology -- began a conversation on Twitter. The result of that dialogue was published today in the International Journal of Paleopathology, in a paper written by bioarchaeologist and infant skeletal expert Sian Halcrow from the University of Otago and featuring contributions by me, OB/GYN Dr. Jen Gunter, biological anthropologists Damien Huffer, Gwen Robbins Schug, Michael Knapp, and William Jungers, and Chilean archaeologist Bernardo Arriaza.In this short paper, we argue that faulty assumptions about the Ata skeleton by researchers untrained in normal fetal development led to ethically problematic testing and overzealous conclusions about the mummy's genome.More specifically, we first outlined the issues the researchers had in assessing Ata's age-at-death, which they assumed was much older -- 6 to 8  years -- based on an incorrect analysis of the leg bones. Not one of the methods presented by the researchers, however, actually met the accepted standards for age estimation using bioarchaeological, forensic,  pediatric, or obstetric techniques.Curiously, they also concluded that the skeleton was missing ribs and asserted that the mummy had an elongated cranium. "As experts in human anatomy and skeletal development," we counter, "we find no evidence for any of the skeletal anomalies claimed by the authors. Their observations of ‘anomalies’ represent normal skeletal development in the fetus, cranial molding from delivery, and potential post-mortem taphonomic effects."The issues we found with the original study didn't end there, though. The genomic analysis was also odd, with the researchers finding supposedly novel mutations that could explain what they perceived to be Ata's small size. "In our view," we note, "it is most likely a coincidence that the authors found this individual had some mutations in genes [...] because: 1) the impetus for their analysis was based on a misinterpretation of the skeletal morphology; 2) the specific variants they discovered have no known functional effect on skeletal morphology at this age; and 3) other variants they found are novel with unknown significance."Finally, our third point is about archaeological and contemporary ethics. Although no one knows when Ata died, regardless of her antiquity, her body is governed by either archaeological or forensic laws and ethics. "Irrespective of the time period," we conclude, "the research and publication of data from this specimen does not follow current ethical standards in anthropology" as nowhere in the Genome Research publication is there a sufficient ethics statement or archaeological permit. Once the media coverage died down, we asked ourselves whether the ends of the study justified the means. As anthropologists, anatomists, and doctors who also use social media as a teaching and public outreach tool, we are all keen on educating the public about ancient and modern lifeways; and, after all, the Genome Research study did prove to the public that Ata was human and not extraterrestrial. However, we agreed that "had these researchers involved, from the beginning, a biological anthropologist who specializes in human remains, we are certain that ethical concerns would have been raised regarding the potentially living relatives of Ata and the illegal removal of the mummy from Chile. We therefore cannot conclude that the ends justify the means. In the end, even the novel genetic variations discovered in Ata’s genome are of uncertain significance."As DNA research becomes faster, easier, and cheaper, it is being undertaken much more frequently today than it has been in the past. Our ethics need to keep up, and we need to involve multidisciplinary teams when doing it. DNA researchers not trained in forensic or archaeological ethics could get themselves in significant legal trouble if they don't stop to question where their samples come from. We therefore see this Genome Research study as somewhat of a cautionary tale for others: "Getting involved in cases that lack clear context and legality, or where the remains have resided in private collections" can open a Pandora's box of issues. "In the case of Ata," we conclude, "costly and time-consuming scientific testing using whole genome techniques was unnecessary and unethical."