Painted Bones Spark 4,500-Year-Old Burial Mystery In Ukraine000Along the banks of the Dniester River in Ukraine lay numerous ancient burial mounds filled with human skeletons; the recent discovery that one woman's bones were painted after her death 4,500 years ago has sparked an archaeological mystery.Starting in 2010, a team of Polish and Ukrainian archaeologists excavated 61 people from four barrow necropolises -- ancient mounds of dirt and stones built over one or more burials. The barrow type of tomb dates back at least 5,500 years to the early Neolithic period and is considered one of the oldest forms of architectural structure in the world. The team's goal was to investigate this geographic area as one of important cultural exchange from the Neolithic through the Bronze and Iron Ages.In a report last year in the journal Baltic-Pontic Studies, Liudmyla Litvinova of the Ukrainian Academy of Science and her team published their findings from the skeletons in the four burial mounds. Most were linked to the Yamna or Yamnaya Culture, a term that means "pit culture" after the specific burial forms, dating to 3300-2600 BC. Importantly, the Yamnaya cultural area is one of the leading hypotheses for where the Proto-Indo-European language began.Little is know about this prehistoric group of people, but bioarchaeologists have been using skeletal and DNA analysis to shed light on their lives. For example, the presence of anemic responses on many of the skulls coupled with a lack of dental cavities suggests they were eating a carbohydrate-poor but protein-heavy diet, in keeping with their economy of mobile animal herding. As with other pastoral cultures, the Yamnaya are assumed to have been patriarchal, and adult males are usually found at the center of the barrow burials.One female skeleton, however, stuck out as different when the researchers looked closely at her. She was found at the archaeological site of Porohy, buried along with 13 other adults and five children, having died in her late 20s. Her skeleton revealed expected evidence of anemia and other dietary issues.But while drawing and photographing the skeleton, "our attention was drawn to regular patterns, such as parallel lines, visible on both elbow bones," Danuta ?urkiewicz from the Institute of Archaeology at Adam Mickiewicz University in Pozna? said in a press release. The researchers had never seen decorations on bones from this culture before, much less on a woman whose skeleton was covered in black colored patterns reminiscent of tattoos. "[She] had to be an important member of the community," ?urkiewicz notes.The patterns appear to have been made long after the woman's death. Her tomb was reopened, the decorations were made, and the bones were rearranged in proper anatomical order once more. Chemical analysis of the black decorations, which is detailed by ?urkiewicz in the upcoming August issue of Baltic-Pontic Studies, has revealed they were likely made with tar derived from wood.Simple tattoos are well known from …tzi, the mummy of a man who died around 3300 BC in the Alps; his appear to have been made from fireplace ash or soot. In later barrow type burials in the Pazyryk Culture in Siberia, there is also evidence of tattoos in the so-called Siberian Ice Maiden. Tattoos on living skin, though, are quite different than decorations on dead bone.These designs are instead a form of secondary burial ritual -- as it is called by bioarchaeologists. These post-death rituals are not uncommon throughout the world, particularly in ancient cultures that reused tombs or buried family members together in a collective tomb. But the researchers note that nothing like this has ever been recorded in prehistoric communities in Europe before.While the meaning of the bone designs will likely be discussed for years, it is clear that increased interest in the Yamnaya Culture of Eastern Europe and its neighbor, the Corded Ware Culture of central Europe, is changing how we view the pastoralist ancestors who gave rise to the languages that nearly half of us speak today.