Archaeologists Find Intestinal Worms In Burials From The Time Of Hippocrates000The tiny Greek island of Kos is known mostly for its most famous denizen: Hippocrates, a physician who lived in the 5th-4th centuries BC and lent his name centuries later to the Hippocratic Oath. But on the nearby island of Kea, archaeologists have tested two dozen ancient burials to see whether they can link the presence of intestinal parasites with the writings of Hippocrates and his followers.Soil samples from the pelvises of 25 skeletons dating from the Neolithic to Byzantine periods and buried on Kea were analyzed at the University of Cambridge by palaeopathologist Piers Mitchell and his team. The results are published today by the Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports in a paper that also includes authors from the University of Pennsylvania, University of Witwatersrand, and the Greek Ephorate of Paleoanthropology and Speleology.The research team was particularly interested in isolating evidence of intestinal parasites from the soil samples, as the Hippocratic texts describe parasites that could be interpreted as roundworm (Ascaris lumbricoides), tapeworm segments (Taenia species), and pinworm (Enterobius vermicularis). Making a direct link between parasites discovered in the ancient soil and the Hippocratic texts, however, had never been done before.In order to look for parasites -- or rather, parasite eggs, which preserve in the archaeological record -- the team studied soil from nine Neolithic burials, one Chalcolithic, two Bronze Age, ten Roman, and three Byzantine burials, to get an idea of the parasite load over several millennia on the island.Out of the 25 burials studied, four were found to have parasite eggs: one Neolithic person had whipworm, while roundworm was found in one Late Bronze Age burial and two Roman-era burials. This analysis, the archaeologists write, "provides the first archaeological evidence for intestinal helminths in ancient Greece." Since parasite eggs were found over such a long period of time, the researchers conclude that these helminth infections may very well have been common in the past.In comparing the direct evidence of parasites with the Hippocratic texts, while the researchers did not find pinworm or tapeworm as mentioned in the historical records, they did discover whipworm. "We agree with past suggestions," they conclude, "that Hippocrates and his students did most likely see examples of roundworm."Palaeopathologist Francesco Galassi, who was not involved in this research, commends the methodology employed in this study. He tells me that "studies like this are of remarkable relevance, since they allow an interesting matching of ancient textual sources with hard biological evidence. A careful combination such as this can yield vital information about past diseases and the people who suffered from them."Interestingly, the island of Kea did not have the full range of parasites that the team expected to see based on previous studies. The researchers conclude their paper by suggesting that "this may reflect an environment that did not suit the range of zoonotic parasites found in the well-watered regions of northern Europe." However, future research by Mitchell and his colleagues could yield additional evidence of parasites. Since tapeworms, for example, have been found elsewhere in the ancient Mediterranean, it is likely that a larger sample size in a future study will uncover evidence of this in Greece.