Did Toxic Rum Kill These 19th Century British Soldiers?11250During the French Revolutionary Wars in the late 18th century, the British military was deployed to take over French possessions in the West Indies, and another West Indies campaign from 1804-1810 during the Napoleonic Wars saw the British military taking over the Caribbean. These campaigns were not without casualties. Tens of thousands of British soldiers succumbed to yellow fever, while others fell victim to heavy metal poisoning. A recent analysis of skeletons from the Royal Naval Hospital cemetery in Antigua provides some much- needed clues to the cause of poisoning.Exposure to lead in the colonial period is well-known historically. Lead is a useful metal; it’s easy to work and durable, and it was used to make pipes, to line water containers, for cooking utensils and pots, as ammunition, and even as cosmetics and flavoring. But lead is, of course, toxic and causes major problems with the nervous system. In order to investigate the extent of lead use in the colonial West Indies, a group of researchers led by bioarchaeologist Tamara Varney of Lakehead University examined 31 people found in the Royal Naval Hospital in English Harbor, Antigua.Ranging in age from infants to older adults, the skeletons provided clues to the diverse nature of the population. Men of both European and African ancestry were buried in the cemetery, which is significant since it’s the only mixed-heritage burial ground known from this time period. Most likely, the European men were British naval personnel, while the African men were enslaved laborers associated with the Navy.Using a technique called synchrotron radiation x-ray fluorescence (SR-XRF), Varney and colleagues essentially mapped the distribution of lead in a thin section of human bone from 17 adult males. Then, they used mass spectrometry to measure the precise amount of lead in the bones. Varney and her team found a range of lead concentrations in the skeletons they sampled: between 13 and 336 parts per million, where a “normal” range of lead is 5-30 ppm. A person with more than 80 ppm of lead in his bones is usually symptomatic for lead poisoning. This means that at least 14 of the 17 people they tested from the Royal Naval Hospital cemetery “experienced at least mild Pb poisoning, with 9 having high enough levels to suggest more severe poisoning.”The big question, though, is how did these men get lead poisoning? There are a number of ways in which they could have been exposed to lead, including canned goods, medicinal treatments, and contaminated water sources. This cemetery, however, pre-dates the use of canned foods by the Royal Navy, which makes those an unlikely source. As the skeletons are associated with a hospital, medicinal use could explain the high lead levels, as could the fact that Antigua lacks sufficient natural water sources to provision an army. Rainwater stored in cisterns or other lead-lined containers could have contributed to these people’s lead burden.One unique cause, though, “is the consumption of lead contaminated alcoholic beverages, notably rum,” Varney and colleagues note. They further explain that “rum was both formally and informally distilled using lead worms (condensation coils) on stills, and it was consumed in quantity by naval personnel who were entitled and accustomed to at least their daily allotment of rum, a well-established tradition in the Royal Navy” well into the 20th century. Excessive consumption of Antiguan rum, along with potential medicinal treatments and stagnant water, likely contributed to the high levels of lead in the bones of these men associated with the British Royal Navy.Interestingly, one of the skeletons that did not have high levels of lead did have high levels of mercury. This element was commonly used in the era before antibiotics to treat diseases like syphilis and yellow fever. As a yellow fever epidemic is known historically to have affected European soldiers in the West Indies, it’s possible this particular man was treated with mercury to the point that he suffered from mercury toxicity, which potentially led to his death.Although the dangers of heavy metals like lead and mercury have been known for centuries, bioarchaeologists around the world are finding evidence of heavy metal poisoning in a variety of skeletons. This analysis by Varney and colleagues represents new information about the era of European colonization of the West Indies as well as an advance in techniques archaeologists can use to identify and quantify lead and mercury poisoning in the past.