How Castration And Opera Changed The Skeleton Of 19th Century Singer Pacchierotti117447The skeleton of Gaspare Pacchierotti, a famous 19th century male mezzo-soprano, was exhumed so that researchers could study the effects that castration had on his body. But their analysis found that the physical act of being a professional opera singer also resulted in changes to Pacchierotti’s skeleton.Historical information about the man’s early life is spotty, but he was born in 1740 and castrated before he was 12 years old, to preserve his young male voice. From his debut at 19 to his retirement at 53, Pacchierotti was one of the most well-known and sought-after opera singers of the time.Writing today in Nature’s Scientific Reports, a team of researchers at the University of Padua (Italy) explain their anthropological and medical assessment of the skeleton, which was exhumed from a grave marked with a headstone bearing Pacchierotti’s name. Using forensic archaeological techniques, as well as CT analysis and x-ray microtomography (XMT), the team, led by Alberto Zanatta, found evidence not only of castration but also of Paccherotti’s occupation as an opera singer.Castrati are usually quite tall, as a result of delayed fusion of the long bones of the legs, and Zanatta and colleagues found that Pacchierotti was likely about 6’3?? in height. This delayed fusion is also evident in Pacchierotti’s hip bone, which preserves the line of fusion at the iliac crest. Additionally, castrati tend to be affected by osteoporosis at a young age owing to the decrease in bone mineral density as a result of the change in hormones. The team found that Pacchierotti’s lumbar spine had several fractures, and that his leg and arm bones had low bone density, all related to osteoporosis. These anatomical abnormalities can be chalked up to castration’s effect on the skeleton.On further examination of Pacchierotti’s skeleton and the medical literature, Zanatta and colleagues identified three skeletal anomalies that may be the result of singing opera.First, “we discovered modifications in the insertion of three important respiratory muscles: scalenus posterior, serratus anterior, and serratus posterior superior,” they write in their article. These muscles lift the ribs and aid in respiration and inspiration. The changes in Pacchierotti are equivalent to those found in a study of modern professional opera singers.The second anomaly is in the shoulder joint. Both shoulder blades had marks indicating a strong triceps brachii muscle which, the researchers write, “acts on the shoulder joint and is involved in retroversion and adduction of the arm.” Pacchierotti, they believe, was using his arms a lot during performances.And finally, the opera singer’s neck vertebrae showed signs of overuse. This part of the spine is easy to injure and therefore it is not uncommon to see osteoporosis or arthritis in the neck of elderly individuals such as Pacchierotti, who died at the age of 81. However, Zanatta and colleagues also discovered that modern research into the neck vertebrae of professional singers revealed deformation of the same bones. “A correct postural attitude [in singing],” the researchers note, “requires the cervical spine to be maintained in an erect position, in nuchal elongation, avoiding lordosis, extension, and lifting of the jaw.” That is, the way Pacchierotti sang in order to optimize his soprano voice almost certainly contributed to his neck issues.The only other body of a castrato that has been examined is that of Farinelli. Whereas Farinelli’s remains were incomplete and fragmentary, Pacchierotti’s body is the first whole skeleton of a castrato ever studied. “The lack of castrate skeletons” in the archaeological record, anthropologist Kathryn Reusch writes in her dissertation The Archaeology of Castration, “may be due to a lack of recognition of the physical effects of castration on the skeleton.” Analysis of the skeleton of Pacchierotti is therefore helping to move this growing forensic and bioarchaeological research field forward.   Francesco Galassi, head of the Italian Paleopathology Project at the University of Zurich, tells me he is “positively impressed” by the research. He notes that, by combining multiple lines of evidence, Zanatta and colleagues “have made it possible to reconstruct a logical etiological-pathological mechanism” for the skeletal changes. While Galassi wishes that additional historical records were available, which could further point to Pacchieriotti’s occupation and physical bearing, he says that the study “sheds much clearer scientific light on the skeletal modifications and occupational markers of castrati.”