Intestinal Worm Discovered In Ancient Roman Coffin13654A rectangular lead coffin dating to the 3rd to 4th century AD has produced the first evidence of an intestinal worm in Roman-era France. Discovered in Januay-Clan, in the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region of west-central France, the sealed coffin contained the body of an older adult male as well as a significant amount of organic material that archaeologists pored over in search of parasite residue.Writing in the latest issue of the Korean Journal of Parasitology, Benjamin Dufour of the University of Bourgogne and colleagues took samples of soil from within the pelvis, on the bone surfaces, and from the bottom of the lead coffin. They then micro-sieved the soil and used microscopic analysis to look for the remains of ancient parasites.One of the two lead coffins they analyzed came up positive Ñ two ovoid eggs shaped like a lemon were discovered in soil from the pelvis. The researchers write that Òbecause of the size and the archaeological context, these eggs were identified as the human whipworm, T. trichiura.ÓIt is comparatively easy to get infected with whipworm, both today and in the past. People accidentally ingest fertile eggs of the parasite by consuming polluted soil, food, or drinking water. This disease is therefore linked to poor hygiene (especially in the preparation of food), to the use of human feces to fertilize crops, and to poor waste management.People infected with whipworm might be asymptomatic, but in cases of massive infection, they will have diarrhea, anemia, and even rectal prolapse.Dufour and colleagues note that whipworm infection has been discovered at seven different archaeological sites throughout Europe dating to various times in the Imperial period. Although Roman culture brought with it the use of public baths for personal hygiene and pigs to clean the streets, clearly these were not enough to mitigate the development of parasitic infections in humans.Francesco Galassi, an expert in ancient disease who was not involved in the present study, commented that this study is interesting because it Òfurther highlights the actual health burden of parasites in the ancient Roman world and confirms what previous bioarchaeological studies and ancient historical sources had hinted at.Ó Further work analyzing the genetics of the parasites might be a way forward, Galassi notes, to understand Òthe evolutionary history of these parasites and their impact on human history.Ó This new article is part of a special journal issue devoted to paleoparasitology, a growing field of research that reveals just how long humans have coexisted with parasites.