Skeleton Of Medieval Giantess Unearthed From Polish Cemetery136983Just outside of the Medieval church of the Ostrów Lednicki stronghold in Poland, archaeologists from the Museum of the First Piast at Lednica have unearthed the strange burial of a giantess. The woman’s skeleton showed that she reached a towering height of 7’2?? but also that her short life was full of traumatic injuries and disease.The giantess was found in a cemetery that was once used solely by the elite of the area: dignitaries, the very wealthy, and people connected with Boles?aw the Brave, the king of Poland in the early 11th century, and with the local Piast ruling dynasty. By the late 12th century, though, the cemetery saw more and more burials of commoners, with over 2,500 skeletons recovered at the site of Ostrów Lednicki Island.But in spite of the elite nature of the cemetery, its most famous resident is a woman from a lower social class who died in her late 20s. Writing recently in the book New Developments in the Bioarchaeology of Care, archaeologists Magdalena Matczak and Tomasz Koz?owski detail the intriguing skeleton and the odd nature of the grave.While all other burials are made with the head to the west, this woman’s head faces east. There were no artifacts at all present with her body. Even the positioning of her body is strange, sloping at an angle with her left hand close to her skull, and right arm and left leg bent instead of extended.The most impressive thing about the woman, though, is her height — 215.5 cm or 7’2??. Her bones are normally proportioned — just very, very large — meaning she almost certainly suffered from gigantism, which is when the pituitary gland over- produces growth hormone and causes people to grow to between 7 and 9 feet tall. She also suffered from acromegaly, which has a similar cause but which occurs after the growth plates of the bones have closed, making the bones of the head larger.People with gigantism and acromegaly are well-known throughout history, owing to the fact that it’s difficult not to notice them. You’ve probably heard of André the Giant, either through his professional wrestling career or because of his role as Fezzik in the classic movie The Princess Bride. André’s physical characteristics were caused by both gigantism and acromegaly. Women with gigantism and acromegaly are not as well known, though. Perhaps the most famous is Anna Swan, a 19th century Canadian woman who stood close to 8? tall, and who married Martin van Buren Bates, the “Kentucky Giant”. Their second child, a boy who lived for only 11 hours, was over 23 pounds at birth.This Medieval Polish woman had other hallmarks of gigantism and acromegaly — according to bioarchaeologists Judyta Julia G?adykowska-Rzeczycka, Anna Wrzesi?ska, and Anna Sokó?, her spine showed evidence of degenerative joint disease, with disc herniations throughout, probably as a result of her height and body weight. She had broken her right upper arm and left lower leg at some point in her life, and these can also be attributed to her condition because it affects bone mineral density and results in weak bones. Additionally, small nodes on her ribs suggest she suffered from pleurisy, a lung inflammation.Gigantism and acromegaly are also commonly associated with diabetes, hypertension, headaches, sleep apnea, skin changes, swelling of the tongue and, in females, menstrual dysfunction and psychiatric problems. These issues don’t leave marks on the bone, of course, but Matczak and Koz?owski write that “given the correlation between acromegaly and mental disorders, and gigantism and intellectual impairment, it is possible that the woman with gigantism from Ostrów Lednicki suffered from mental or cognitive dysfunction.”The combination of skeletal trauma and potential psychological issues meant that this Medieval Polish woman likely needed at least occasional support from her friends, family or community. At the very least, her leg fracture — which was well healed at her death — meant she was resting and recuperating for several months, presumably while someone else helped care for her.Matczak and Koz?owski add up the skeletal and burial evidence to conclude that “during her lifetime, she may have been subject to different treatment by her community because of her physical abnormalities and/or possible psychological or cognitive problems. However, her survival to middle adulthood, together with evidence indicating she likely received health-related care, suggests that she was not rejected by her society.”    Prior to the 19th century, gigantism was not well known, which makes this Polish giantess quite intriguing. Francesco Galassi, who has studied gigantism and acromegaly from both a medical and palaeopathological perspective, told me that this find “expands our limited knowledge of the evolution of the morphology of these two incapacitating and stigmatizing conditions.” Galassi noted that he would like to see genetic analyses undertaken on this skeleton — and other ancient skeletons around the world with the same conditions — “to better elucidate the pathophysiology of these complex endocrine disorders.”The giantess is not the only Medieval Polish skeleton that belonged to someone a little bit different than the rest of the population. A person with achondroplasia (dwarfism) has also been found at Ostrów Lednicki, and a woman with leprosy was discovered in nearby Ka?dus. Although some of these burials are slightly different in form or orientation, they were all made among others in their community and were therefore not seen as misfits or outcasts.Matczak and Koz?owski conclude their essay by noting that their aim is to “present a wider view of aspects of life in medieval society, including care, emotion, social perception, status of the diseased and the disabled, and the meaning of burial ritual.” Using archaeological and biological evidence, they have shown how a visibly different person may have experienced life and trauma more than six centuries ago.