Archaeologists Discover A New Profession In An Ancient Egyptian Woman's Teeth142552Some archaeologists rejoice in opening graves that have been sealed for millennia, while others marvel when their lab work reveals the hidden past of a particular person. During routine analysis of a skeletal collection from ancient Mendes, two archaeologists discovered odd tooth wear in an older Egyptian woman that suggested her body had more to tell them about her life.The skeleton was originally excavated in the late 1970s by the NYU Institute of Fine Arts Expedition to Mendes, along with 67 others. The site was the capital of ancient Egypt during the 29th Dynasty, or roughly the 4th century BC, but it was occupied continuously for a total of about 5,000 years. In addition to being a capital, Mendes was a trade hub and religious cult center, and archaeologists have also found residential and burial areas.In the 1990s, new excavation by Nancy Lovell of the University of Alberta and her team produced additional bodies, for a total of 92. These burials appeared to be of middle-class people based on burial style. However, the grave of this particular older woman, which dated to 2181-2055 BC, was rich and elaborate compared to others in the area. Her skeleton had been placed in a wooden coffin, and her journey to the afterlife was outfitted with alabaster vessels, a bronze mirror, and cosmetics. In going through the human remains from Mendes, Lovell, along with her former student Kimberley Palichuk, noticed something intriguing in her teeth.Writing in the recently published Bioarchaeology of Marginalized People, Lovell and Palichuk note that 16 of the woman's 24 preserved teeth "show two patterns of wear which are inconsistent with chewing food." Specifically, 14 teeth exhibit flat abrasions, while "the most unusual pattern of wear appears on both the vestibular [lip-side] and oral [tongue-side] surfaces of the maxillary central incisor crowns," which is more wedge-like.While some cultures modify the teeth on purpose -- such as by inlaying stones, filing them to certain shapes, or removing certain teeth entirely -- the archaeologists reason that since there is "no evidence for intentional modification of teeth in ancient Egypt in texts, artistic depictions, or archaeologically recovered dental remains, the unusual wear this woman exhibits must have been acquired incidentally."Incidental tooth modification is still interesting, however, because it is often the by-product of the use of the teeth in repetitive tasks. "A number of ethnographic accounts record the use of the anterior teeth as aids in the preparation of vegetable fibers for basketry, cordage, and other products," Lovell and Palichuk write. Since reeds were used extensively at Mendes, including as mats for burial, "the wedge-shaped wear could have been caused by the splitting of vegetable material," they suggest.A strong case can be made that the plant that the woman was running between her teeth was Cyperus papyrus because "papyrus stalks were used for firewood, to make boxes and baskets for storage and transport of goods, and to make sandals, curtains, and floor mats," the researchers explain. Stripping off the outer rind of the papyrus stalk with the teeth would cause abrasions, but the microscopic bits of silica in the plant would also scour tooth enamel, hastening tooth wear and contributing to the unusual shape of this woman's front teeth.In addition to the oddly shaped wear, many of the woman's teeth were found to have horizontal microwear features. "The patches would seem to have been caused by a rubbing action that occurred horizontally at the gum line and would have abraded the teeth," Lovell and Palichuk say. The most likely cause of this microwear is habitual or excessive toothbrushing.While modern toothbrushes are made of soft, synthetic bristles, in ancient Egypt, some people used frayed twigs and possibly a type of dentifrice like sodium bicarbonate or natron for cleaning their teeth. This practice was not common, though. "The rarity of tooth cleaning in ancient Egypt may help to explain why only [this] one individual in the skeletal sample exhibited the abrasion patches," Lovell and Palichuk note. "It may be the case that plant residues adhered to this woman's teeth as a result of her task activities, necessitating regular cleaning." Use of natron or other natural salt could even have had the secondary effect of an analgesic, which this woman may have appreciated if her worn teeth caused her pain.Sonia Zakrzewski, a bioarchaeologist at the University of Southampton, told me that this study is intriguing and noted that "too rarely have we as archaeologists actually considered the practicalities of using the reeds and who might be doing this. We can feel empathy for this woman and the likely pain she felt resulting from her excessive dental wear."The discovery of this older woman with unusual dental issues "has important implications for our understanding of the professionalization of women in ancient Egypt," Lovell and Palichuk explain, because previous researchers have suggested, based primarily on artistic works commissioned by men, that there were only seven professions open to women in ancient Egyptian culture -- priestess, musician, singer, dancer, mourner, weaver, and midwife. But this longstanding assumption about women's work, bioarchaeologist Tamer Gad Rashed of Cairo University tells me, is incorrect because "throughout Egyptian history, women occupied all positions. The present study's findings show that Egyptian women were - and still are - found everywhere and in every sector of Egyptian daily life."This older woman's skeleton, Lovell and Palichuk suggest, may therefore represent "the professionalization of women that is not registered in the documents and tomb scenes that are created by men and reflect male interests and biases." Female craft specialists were simply not acknowledged by ancient Egyptian conventions, making them historically marginalized figures. "We can construct a richer representation of women's work in ancient Egypt by allowing individuals to tell their stories through their skeletons," the researchers conclude.Casey Kirkpatrick, a bioarchaeologist at Western University with an expertise in Egyptian dentistry, notes that this study is important because "it suggests that ancient Egyptian women may have contributed to society in ways other than those that have been traditionally depicted or described." Zakrzewski agrees that the analysis of this ancient woman's contribution is the key to her a professional identity. "We can now see her as being at the core of her community rather than as a marginalized person," Zakrzewski says, "albeit after having been marginalized by archaeologists in the past."More bioarchaeological work of the sort that Lovell and Palichuk have done would be welcome in order to better understand the society of ancient Egypt, Kirkpatrick suggests, as "there is still much to be learned about the lives of individuals relegated to the periphery of history." Additional work, Rashed agrees, "would result in more interesting findings related to the great Egyptian Civilization."Individual teeth may seem to the untrained eye like an extraneous part of a larger burial. But placed into the context of a skeleton and a past culture, as Lovell and Palichuk have done, even tiny marks on a handful of teeth can reveal a hidden world whose surface archaeologists have so far have only scratched.