Pot Polish On Bones From Franklin's 1845 Arctic Expedition Is Evidence Of Cannibalism14387During the height of maritime trade networks between Europe and the New World, explorers were sent out by their country’s leaders to try to find the Northwest Passage, a shipping route through the Arctic Ocean and around the northern coast of North America. The most famous of these exploration parties was that of Sir John Franklin, who set sail from England in May of 1845 but never returned. Archaeologists now believe they have found incontrovertible proof of various stages of cannibalism among the crew.Franklin set out with two ships and 128 men. By September 1846, both ships had gotten trapped in ice off King William Island, in Nunavut, northern Canada. Word did not reach England until 1859, when another explorer found a note from the crew. It was dated April 25, 1848 and said that Franklin had died on June 11, 1847. The crew planned to start walking the following day toward the Back River. Not one of the members of the expedition made it back alive. Inuit peoples reported to other explorers that there was cannibalism among the members of the expedition, but many rejected these reports until bioarchaeologists studied bones from the tragic voyage.       Numerous skeletons of the Franklin expedition sailors were recovered in the 1980s and 1990s from sites on King William Island and Beechey Island by a team of archaeologists led by Owen Beattie of the University of Alberta. The King William Island bones revealed the first evidence of cannibalism: nearly one?third of all the bones found had knife marks from flesh removal. These were likely the remains of the people who set out for the Back River in 1848.New evidence of cannibalism has been found in the Franklin Expedition remains by Beattie and bioarchaeologist Simon Mays of Historic England. In an article just published in the International Journal of Osteoarchaeology, they write about the pattern of so?called survival or starvation cannibalism, which progresses in stages: “Initially, flesh is cut from an articulated corpse, and large muscle groups are often targeted. If further calories are needed, there may be corpse dismemberment and, finally, processing of the bones to extract fat from medullary cavities and cancellous bone.”The knife marks found decades ago by Beattie and colleagues suggest the early stages of cannibalism, when flesh was removed from the bodies of the dead Franklin crew and consumed by the living sailors. This new research, though, was done to find out whether the Franklin crew were breaking human bones to get additional calories from bone marrow in a last?ditch attempt at survival. Mays and Beattie’s article is therefore “the first of its kind to address the various stages of cannibalism,” bioarchaeologist Sarah Schrader of the University of California, Santa Cruz, who was not affiliated with this study, tells me.In order to figure out whether end?stage cannibalism happened, Mays and Beattie looked at three Franklin Expedition skeletons for evidence of burning, for specific patterning of fractures in the bones, and for evidence of “pot polish,” where broken or cut bone ends become smooth from being tossed in a metal or ceramic vessel during cooking.None of the bones the researchers studied were burned, but there was some evidence of smashing while the bones were fresh. However, it is unclear if these breaks were made by people immediately after death or by animals trampling on them much later.    But when Mays and Beattie found pot polish on two leg bones, they knew there was clear evidence that someone boiled parts of these men’s bodies for at least 20 minutes in a cooking pot. Even more interesting is that one of the bones with pot polish was probably also reused.After its marrow was consumed, someone used the human bone fragment as a spoon or knife to scrape more fat from the rim of the pot.Inuit informants who relayed information years later to other explorers said they saw human bones broken for their marrow and then boiled. The Franklin Expedition had access to large copper pots, and they likely would have made fires from wood salvaged from their trapped ships, or from driftwood or seaweed. “It is very rare that bioarchaeologists encounter such a well?informed context such as this,” Schrader says. “In addition to skeletal evidence of cannibalism, Mays and Beattie have Inuit reports, written documentation, and artifacts.”Bioarchaeological evidence of “pot polish” along with cut marks on human bones have settled the case of cannibalism among the 1845 Franklin Expedition. As the Inuit reported, the shipwrecked sailors were forced to carry out a range of cannibalistic practices in an attempt to survive the harsh environment.