This Woman From Medieval Iceland Lived With A Disfiguring Facial Anomaly16321In a Medieval church cemetery in Iceland, archaeologists found hundreds of burials eroding from along the coast of a tiny island called Haffjar?arey. One woman's skull presented a unique puzzle: what was the cause of her disfiguring facial anomaly, and what was it like to live with it?The skeletons were found in a plot next to a Catholic church dedicated to St. Nicholas, which dated from approximately 1200 through 1563, when the church and cemetery were closed because coastal erosion became too problematic. Over the span of forty years, between 1905 and 1945, more than 120 skeletons were recovered by archaeologists. Large-scale analysis of this Medieval collection was not accomplished until 2017, however.Writing in the International Journal of Paleopathology, bioarchaeologist Sarah Hoffman of the University at Buffalo and her colleagues detail their analysis of one specific skeleton: that of a young adult female with an asymmetrical right side. Specifically, the right side of her nose and upper jaw show abnormal development, which "has resulted in the appearance of a cleft lip or facial cleft."In order to better understand the woman's cranial anatomy, Hoffman and colleagues scoured the literature on ancient and modern diseases and conditions. After ruling out a true cleft, Treacher Collins and CHARGE syndromes, fibrous dysplasia, and hemifacial microsomia, they reached a conclusion that the woman likely had either Goldenhar syndrome or facio-auriculo-vertebral sequence (FAVs). Both of these conditions include asymmetry of the face, clefts in the facial region, abnormalities in the neck vertebrae, and anomalies of the cardiac, pulmonary, renal, and central nervous systems.Trying to narrow down the diagnosis is difficult, however, because Goldenhar syndrome is distinguished by eye tumors and skin tags, which are not preserved in the skeleton, and because "in the paleopathological literature, information on FAVs and its associated features is extremely limited," Hoffman and colleagues explain. FAVs can range from barely detectable skeletal changes to severe restriction of growth of the face and skull."It is clear from the bioarchaeological and clinical evidence," Hoffman and colleagues write, "that this individual would have suffered from disfigurement and possibly some level of perceived disability resulting from her condition, yet she lived into adulthood."Whether her face caused any social problems for her, though, is unclear. "Physical disfigurements are often linked to specific negative character traits within the Icelandic Sagas," the archaeologists explain, "but there is no evidence that affected individuals were marginalized by society due to facial abnormalities." Since this woman was buried in the same way as everyone else in the cemetery, Hoffman and colleagues do not think that she was in any way an outcast.Nevertheless, the woman may have required social support. Bioarchaeologist Sara Becker of the University of California Riverside, who was not involved in this research, suggests that "as humans, we judge and evaluate others via their faces. We search faces for signs of friendliness or hostility in order to make a connection." Becker thinks, based on the anatomical anomalies, this woman would have been seen as different from other members of her community. "But it is most interesting," Becker says, "that this woman from Medieval times was cared for by members of her community."Evidence of social support comes in the form of the strontium isotope analysis that Hoffman and her colleagues undertook. They explain that "while the rest of the individuals sampled from Haffjar?arey present with higher isotopic ratios signifying a primarily marine-based diet," the woman with the facial asymmetry has "a lower isotopic ratio more reflective of a mixed marine and terrestrial diet." It's possible that this woman was consuming more skyr (Icelandic yoghurt) and whey during childhood, rather than the dried fish that the rest of the community ate.Becker finds the strontium results convincing, noting that they "show that they cared for her. If she couldn't eat the tougher food typical for her community, perhaps she was fed nourishing food that she was able to consume with her facial and jaw deformities."While disability is not yet well understood in the archaeology of Medieval Iceland, it has played an important role in historical studies of this time and place. The fact that this woman lived well into adulthood with FAVs in a forbidding climate in the Medieval era, the archaeologists conclude, "has the potential to contribute to the discussion of disability and perceived disability in the past."