Mass Sacrifice Of Children And Llamas In Ancient Peru Reflects Trauma Over Climate Change16631Recent excavations at a 15th century archaeological site on the coast of Peru have revealed an enormous mass burial of 137 children, three adults, and 200 llamas or alpacas. Archaeologists argue that the sacrifice may have been related to a traumatic climate event.The burial is part of a site called Huanchaquito-Las Llamas (HLL) in the Province of Trujillo, just 350 meters from the shore and 2 miles north of the ancient city of Chan Chan, which was the largest pre-contact city in South America and the capital of the Chimœ state. The latter part of this ancient state's 11th-15th century AD existence, however, was full of destabilizing events such as warfare, and locations like Punta Lobos and Chan Chan have revealed evidence of mass executions and human sacrifice over the past several years.In a new research paper published today by PLoS One, archaeologists Gabriel Prieto of the National University of Trujillo, John Verano of Tulane University, and their colleagues consider the meaning of the HLL sacrifice, which is unique in both its scale and its composition. When it was first discovered in 2011, the HLL site immediately revealed a high number of child skeletons in unusual burial positions and with cuts to their breastbone, all within an area of 700 square meters.The children were wrapped in plain cotton shrouds following their deaths, the archaeologists discovered, and many were buried in groups of three. Some children had their faces painted with red cinnabar, while others wore fabric headdresses. The llamas were placed on top of or next to the children. And trails of footprints of adults, children, and llamas dotted the site, pressed into a thick layer of fresh mud and preserved for nearly 600 years.Laboratory analysis so far has determined that the boys and girls were in good health and ranged in age from 5 to 14, with a majority of them between 8-12 years old. About a dozen of the children had modified cranial vaults, a practice that indicated their association with a particular ethnic group within the Chimœ civilization.What surprised the archaeologists was that "nearly all children with complete sternal elements showed a single transverse cut," Prieto and colleagues write. "Many of the children had visible spreading and displacement of the ribs, indicating the chest was opened forcefully. Heart removal is a likely motivation."Little previous evidence has been found of human sacrifice in this region of Peru. However, old historical records by Spanish chroniclers may provide clues to its purpose. Friar Antonio de la Calancha, for example, claimed that child sacrifices were made by the Chimœ during lunar eclipses and were sometimes made to sacred places or huacas. And in the 16th century, Crist—bal de Molina described Inca child sacrifice, writing that children "had their live hearts taken out, and so the priests offered the beating hearts to the huacas to which the sacrifice was made."Given the thick layer of mud that the graves of children and llamas were dug into, though, Prieto and colleagues suspect a catastrophic climate event may have precipitated the sacrifice. "It is probably associated with the El Ni–o-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon," they note, "that periodically brings coastal flooding and elevated sea temperatures that disrupt the marine food chain in northern and central Peru. It is possible that the sacrifices were made in response to the heavy rains."Bioarchaeologist Celeste Gagnon of Wagner College, who works at a nearby site in Peru, finds this hypothesis plausible. "Given that the Peruvian north coast is ground zero for ENSO," she tells me, "the weather pattern would have decimated the marine resources that were so important to their lives. This may also be why at least one event of Moche sacrifice about 700 years earlier near Chan Chan also has ENSO mud evidence." Matthew Piscitelli, an archaeologist at the Field Museum, concurs that Prieto and colleagues have made a compelling argument about the motivation for the sacrifice. He tells me that since the research "ties together so many lines of evidence--isotopic, genetic, osteological, zooarchaeological--it's hard not to believe that this was how this prehistoric population reacted to the traumatic effects of ENSO."The trauma of the ancient climate events may therefore help explain the sacrifice. Piscitelli suggests that it may be difficult for us to imagine carrying out this sacrifice, "but you need to put yourself in their shoes. How would you react if the world as you know it was crumbling around you, with catastrophic flooding and searing droughts? Without meteorology, where would you turn? In this case, it might have been religion and a belief that only the ultimate sacrifice would appease what the Chimœ thought were angry gods."But the discovery of this grim graveyard raises the question of another kind of trauma: the emotional effects it had on the archaeologists and may have on the public.Gagnon, who works in the same lab in Peru as these researchers, witnessed their analysis in 2017. She recalls that she was "sharing a space with textile researchers, and they were processing loin cloths" that several of the male children were dressed in. "Some of them were covered in what were clearly blood and bodily fluids, with spatter patterns and pooling apparent."As a bioarchaeologist myself, I am used to dealing with human skeletons from ancient cemeteries, but this context of sacrifice deeply affected me as I was reading the PLoS paper because I am also the mother of two children within the age range of those sacrificed. So I asked the archaeologists about their experiences with this mass burial.Prieto told me that when the remains were first discovered in 2011, "I was not a father, so my perspective was very objective. But once my son was born in 2013, and during the field seasons of 2014 and 2016, I felt terrible - it is really hard to excavate these remains. I have to keep in mind that someone has to recover these bodies and record them in the best possible way, though."Verano has many more years of experience in forensic anthropology, in which he has dealt with the bodies of people who were the victims of genocide. Because of that and because this site dates to several centuries ago rather than very recently, Verano told me that that it was second nature for him as a scientist to "drop in and start asking questions, and not think too much about it." Even so, the scale of the sacrifice was a hard thing for him to get his head around. "It's an amazing ancient society, but a really intense thing they did. What was it like for the children to be marched down there?"Footprints around the burials are clearly identifiable as those of adults wearing sandals and small children who walked barefoot, Prieto, Verano, and colleagues note. "At least two large groups of children and camelids came from the northern and southern sides of the site to meet at the center of the sacrificial area. From there, the sacrifice presumably was conducted, and the human and animal bodies placed in burial pits excavated through the mud layer" by Chimœ priests or other officials.Matt Velasco, a bioarchaeologist at Cornell University who also works in Peru, tells me that this "is a remarkable example of the kind of fine-grained reconstructions of past events that are possible when multiple lines of evidence are brought into conversation with one another -- down to the manner in which processions of children and llamas converged at the site of sacrifice." Gagnon agrees, saying that "the excavations at HLL are among the most significant Peruvian finds in the last several decades."Although the sacrifice is the aspect of the discovery that has captured the public's attention, Gagnon says that "continued analysis of the amazingly well preserved biological and cultural remains will yield new data for years." Specifically, Velasco notes that there is "striking variability in the form of cranial modification compared to other sites during this time period. It will be really interesting to see if further isotopic and genetic analyses support the hypothesis that the children were brought to HLL from different corners of the Chimœ state."Following the completion of excavation of the mass burial site, Verano told me, last summer the town of Huanchaco just north of Huanchaquito installed a memorial to the prehistoric event on the beach between the two towns. One tree was planted for each of the 140 people killed there in 1450 AD, and a statue was erected of a child next to a juvenile llama. Prieto, who is originally from Huanchaco, was instrumental in the dedication of the new monument and has further plans to help build a local museum to the ancient Chimœ culture. The story of the children of Huanchaquito-Las Llamas is not yet over.