Gruesome Evidence Of Political Torture Found On Precolumbian Skulls20648Not far from the shores of Lake Titicaca in the Kallawaya region of Bolivia, archaeologists excavating the 200?800 AD site of Wata Wata discovered three skulls of people who had been beaten, beheaded, and defleshed.In the Central Andes, there is copious evidence in Precolumbian art of detached heads: stone sculptures and serving vessels found in ceremonial areas depict deities with an axe in one hand and a freshly decapitated head in the other. But until now, archaeologists have assumed these depictions were more figurative than literal, as very little physical evidence of this kind of violence has been found. Writing in the latest issue of Latin American Antiquity, bioarchaeologist Sara Becker now at the University of California at Riverside and archaeologist Sonia Alconini of the University of Texas at San Antonio detail a chilling new discovery: a cache of butchered human heads.Becker’s osteological analysis of the skulls found they were from one male and two female adults. All of them had moderate cranial vault modification, the ancient practice of binding the head when skull bones are forming in childhood to create a flattened, sloping, or cone?shaped head. And all of them “were exposed to violent practices at or around the time of death,” including, Becker notes, “some combination of chop marks, cut marks, bone scrapes, and depressed skull fractures.” Each individual head tells a gruesome story.Cut marks on the neck vertebrae and skull indicate that Individual 1, one of the adult females, was scalped and beheaded. Her upper cheekbones, right around her eyes, also displayed cut marks, meaning her eyes may have been gouged out.Blunt force trauma to Individual 2, an adult male, speaks to his suffering a broken nose that healed before his death. A large unhealed skull fracture, made around the time of his death, was created with massive force from angled blows to the side of his head. He too has cut marks around his eye orbit, further bolstering the researchers’ claim of eye extraction.The second adult female, Individual 3, similarly received a massive blow to the head to cause her death. Cut marks on her skull show that her head was defleshed, her lower jaw was removed, and her eyes were cut out.Because of the antiquity of the skulls and their state of preservation, Becker and Alconini cannot be completely certain of the chain of events that led to these three people’s violent deaths. They write that “defleshing took place after portions of the cranium were broken, and Individual 1 was likely deceased or highly incapacitated as skin and tissue were removed. Individuals 2 and 3 were also likely deceased or near death when their crania were defleshed.” Blows to the head came first, but these victims may have been carved up while still alive. Bioarchaeological evidence of cut marks around the eyes of captives among the Moche and historical evidence from the Inca suggest that eye removal was a common form of torture.The Wata Wata skulls were not trophy heads, according to Becker and Alconini. They were not meant to be displayed as a kind of triumph, since there is no evidence they were hung from ropes or held aloft on stakes. Rather, the researchers argue that “these three individuals were handled in such a way as to disempower them. The physical extraction of the eyes of the Wata Wata heads may be a symbol of blindness and blinding the power of these individuals.”“We now have evidence of this practice of head taking among the Nasca, the Moche, and the Wari,” comments bioarchaeologist Tiffiny Tung of Vanderbilt University, who was not part of this study. “It was not an isolated practice in the Andes.” The real benefit of Becker and Alconini’s research, Tung explains, is that it “deepens our understanding of the various ways that people have manipulated and controlled bodies and body parts to express their authority.”Political transitions in the past were often bloody affairs. The Wata Wata skulls date to a change from the Late Formative to the Tiwanaku periods. By decapitating, dismembering, and burying these three individuals, Becker and Alconini think the new political regime may have been adopting “a powerful ideological strategy aimed to end these people’s literal ability to see and communicate, while also controlling them as a vital power source in the afterlife.” This strategic form of ritualized violence may have struck fear into the hearts of those on the wrong side of the political aisle.