Heart Disease Found In 16th-Century Greenland Mummies2145With more than 3 million cases of atherosclerosis in the U.S. each year, this extremely common cardiovascular disease that results from a build-up of fats and cholesterol in arterial walls is the leading killer of people over the age of 40. But heart disease has a long history, with evidence of it found in ancient Egyptians and linked to elite diets full of fatty foods. New evidence from Greenland mummies, however, reveals that a wildly different diet also contributed to atherosclerosis in the 16th century AD.The examination of five mummies from Greenland by an international research team that includes Harvard's Peabody Museum and Brigham and Women's Hospital used CT scans to image plaque in the arteries. This is part of a larger research study currently underway to examine mummies from preindustrial and foraging societies around the world and figure out the rate of heart disease prior to the introduction of the high-fat, high-calorie diets we see in many of today's sedentary Western societies.Analysis of the Greenland mummies - which represent four young adults and one child from an Inuit community - revealed hardened calcium deposits in blood vessels in the chest. Both the young age of these Inuits and their heavily fish-based diet made the discovery of atherosclerosis surprising.Dr. Ron Blankstein, associate director of Brigham's Cardiovascular Imaging Program, suggested instead that factors such as cumulative exposure to smoke from household hearths may have contributed to their development of this disease. The same explanation has been posited for the incidence of atherosclerosis in ancient Egyptian mummies, which mirrors the rate in contemporary Egyptians.A series of articles published over the last few years by the Horus research group detail additional findings of the large mummy research study. Mummies from distinct geographical areas, including Egypt, Korea, China, Syria, Peru, southwest America, and the Aleutian Islands - in addition to European mummies like the famous Ötzi - all presented evidence of atherosclerosis in CT scans. Research papers from the group have been published in such journals as Global Heart and Lancet.The involvement of cardiologists in these ancient mummy studies is important for both better diagnosing ancient diseases and for better understanding the cause of atherosclerosis in contemporary people. "We don’t know as much about the risk factors for atherosclerosis as we used to think we did," cardiologist Dr. Randall Thompson of Saint Luke’s Mid America Heart Institute in Kansas City, who authored the Lancet publication, said in 2014.  "There may be other risk factors that have a bigger role than we appreciate," such as environmental pollution from smoke.While heart disease has been found in most of the mummies that have been CT scanned to date, Dr. Blankstein, who worked on the Greenland mummies, does not think that atherosclerosis is inevitable. "The majority of cardiovascular disease events that we see in [modern] patients is preventable with appropriate diet, weight control, and lifestyle changes, such as regular exercise," he noted in a press release. He hopes that the findings from the mummy project will inspire people to learn more about how to reduce their risk of cardiovascular disease.