What Does Ancient Human Sacrifice Look Like?2156A newly reported skeletal find at Mt. Lykaion, in the Arcadia area of Greece, may be a human sacrifice. This isn’t the first to be interpreted as such, since the practice could be as old as humankind. But how do bioarchaeologists determine whether someone was sacrificed or whether they died in some other way?Human sacrifice has been around for millennia at least, and archaeologists have been identifying it at sites around the world for decades. We can point to several kinds of sacrifice, or at least different intentions behind the purposeful, premeditated killing of another human being, including offerings to the gods, trophy- taking of enemies’ heads or other body parts, and punishment. All of these actions, of course, are situated in a particular culture and in a particular place. That is, an explanation for sacrifice in ancient Greece may not be the same as in prehistoric Peru. Archaeologists need to engage any historical or iconographic representations of the practice in order to fully understand the context behind the bones and burial in question.Ritual violence in the Andes has been well studied by bioarchaeologists in recent years. In an article by Haagen Klaus and colleagues in the journal Antiquity, three different modes of sacrifice are highlighted among the Moche: throat-slitting, semi-decapitation, and chest-opening. In throat-slitting, Klaus and colleagues see sharp force trauma on the front side of the vertebra that hold up the throat. In semi-decapitation, they see sharp trauma to the upper cervical vertebrae along with an odd position of the skull in the grave. And in chest-opening, there is sharp trauma to the collarbones, the breastbone, and the ribs all near the center of the chest, as the victim’s heart was likely cut out.But human sacrifice doesn’t have to involve cutting or stabbing — it can simply involve exposure. Inca child sacrifice victims, for example, appear to have been left on high, cold mountain tops to starve to death. Somewhat similar is the practice of immurement, which is literally a walling-up of a person so they can’t escape. Vestal Virgins in ancient Rome were reportedly immured if they broke their vow of chastity. And the killing or immurement of retainers or servants to be buried with deceased ancient Egyptian leaders is also a form of sacrifice.This means that attributing a skeleton or burial to the result of human sacrifice relies on indications on the bones themselves, the method of disposition of the human remains, and historical or visual evidence of sacrifice. That’s a pretty tall order, and bioarchaeologists don’t take that determination lightly.In the case of the 11th century BC skeleton recently found at Mt. Lykaion in Greece, there are a number of elements that make this unusual burial appear to be a sacrifice.First, the context of the discovery: the skeleton was found in a stone-lined grave on the side of a mountain associated with a temple and altar to Zeus, where archaeologists had previously found animal sacrifices spanning at least a thousand years. “This is a sacrificial altar... so it’s not a place where you would bury an individual. It’s not a cemetery,” archaeologist David Gilman Romano told the AP.       Second, the historical records: Mt. Lykaion has been mentioned by ancient authors such as Plato as a site of human sacrifice — specifically, that a young boy was sacrificed along with animals, and then the meat of both humans and animals was eaten.Third, the bones: this is where things get a little dicey. The Guardian reports that the bones belong to a teenager and that part of the top of the skull was missing. While the archaeological and historical contexts are intriguing, the bones are not yet a smoking gun. As they have not yet been studied by a bioarchaeologist, it is unclear if the teenager was male or female, and it is unclear why the skull is damaged.Circumstantial evidence for human sacrifice at Mt. Lykaion at the end of the Mycenaean era is quite strong. However, as Romano told the American School of Classical Studies at Athens in a blog post published today, “it is very important that the human bones are studied by our physical anthropologist and we have a full report of the skeleton. We don’t know the nature of the death of this individual, so it will be studied in the Wiener Lab at the ASCSA.” The newly-renovated Wiener Laboratory has facilitated research by preeminent Greek bioarchaeologists and zooarchaeologists for nearly 25 years.What might the bioarchaeologists who study this skeleton find? Well, there were two kinds of animal sacrifice in ancient Greece — one involved complete incineration (holokautein) and the other (thyesthai) was a commensal sacrifice in which part of the animal would be eaten. Since historical records suggest that there were commensal animal sacrifices at Mt. Lykaion, we can hypothesize that a human sacrifice may have been treated in the same way: the person’s throat would be cut, flesh roasted and eaten, and inedible parts burned up or thrown out.But the Mt. Lykaion skeleton is not burned, and it’s in anatomical position, so it’s unlikely that person was subject to the same practice as the animals were. That does not, however, preclude throat-slitting — which we find precedence in, for example, the sacrifice of Iphigenia in the Trojan War story. Finding evidence of cut marks on the anterior cervical vertebrae could clinch the interpretation of sacrifice.According to the Greek Culture Ministry, less than 10% of the site on Mt. Lykaion has been excavated. This may mean big finds — and more contextual clues — for archaeologists in the near future. Until then, we have a fascinating skeleton from an historically well-known site that, when analyzed and published, will give us more information one way or another about sacrifice in ancient Greece.