Revolutionary War Hero's Skeleton Suggests He Was Intersex22305Revolutionary War hero and "father of the American cavalry" Casimir Pulaski gained fame when he saved George Washington's life and became a general in the Continental Army. Along with Alexander Hamilton and the Marquis de Lafayette, Pulaski was an immigrant who fought for freedom in both his home country and his adopted one. But unlike other Revolutionary figures, Pulaski did not survive the war, perishing in the Battle of Savannah in 1779. He left a legacy, but no descendants.A monument to Pulaski was erected in Savannah in 1825, with the very same Lafayette laying the cornerstone. While stories about Pulaski's death and the disposition of his body swirled, the Bowen family, which held Greenwich plantation in Georgia for generations, insisted that Pulaski was buried on their land. In 1854, skeletal remains were found where Bowen said they would be, and they were placed in the newly completed monument.The skeletal remains stayed in the monument until 1996, when researchers wondered if those bones were really Pulaski's. It took seven years for the volunteer team -- including a medical examiner, a genealogist, forensic anthropologist, historian, and secretary -- to complete work on the skeleton and attempt to extract DNA, which was then compared to a maternal great-grandniece of Pulaski. While the DNA did not confirm the bones were Pulaski's, neither did it exclude the possibility.Even though the first "Pulaski Identification Committee" came up short on the DNA front, their osteological findings were intriguing.Forensic anthropologist Karen Ramey Burns found that the skeleton had features more in line with the female than male sex. The skeleton, for example, had a wide subpubic angle, a narrow ischiopubic ramus, a pre-auricular sulcus, and a wide sciatic notch, all of which added up to a female-looking pelvis. Additionally, the skull was very gracile, also suggesting potentially female biological sex. However, other than biological sex, attributes of the skeleton lined up well with what was historically known about Pulaski: age at death, short height, light body build, healed fracture of the right hand, osteoarthritis in the hip joints, and facial proportions similar to paintings of him."Although these skeletal features were consistent with the Pulaski Monument Remains actually being Pulaski, without genetic confirmation, none of the features was unique enough to confirm this identification," anthropologist Virginia Hutton Estabrook of Georgia Southern University told me.Estabrook is one member of the new Pulaski Identification Team, formed in 2015. She brought on one of her students, Melissa Powell, whose father had been a member of the earlier project and who allowed her to look through his paperwork from that attempt. She also reached out to Megan Moore at Eastern Michigan University, one of Karen Ramey Burns's friends and colleagues who was in possession of her files and unsolved case information after Burns passed away in 2012."The three of us worked on reassembling all of Burns' documentation of her research," Estabrook says. If the bones in the Pulaski memorial are indeed Pulaski's, the fact that Burns, Estabrook, and Moore all hit on "female" sex based on the skeletal features needed to be explained. "We started combing through the current medical literature about various intersex conditions for information on how they might affect the skeleton."Intersex wasn't an explanation that the previous team had hit on, Estabrook explains, because "we are just now beginning to approach a more nuanced understanding of the differences between the concept of biological sex as developmental and genetic in its basis, and separable from the concept of gender."That is, we generally conceptualize biological sex as binary -- XX or XY chromosomes -- but it's actually more of a continuum, where people can be XXY, XYY, or other combinations. The idea that there are more than two biological sexes "pushes many people's understanding of biology further than they had been taught in school," Estabrook says.Given recent advances in extraction and sequencing of ancient DNA, Estabrook and her team reopen the avenue of inquiry that had dead-ended previously. Stephen Fratpietro was then brought on, and work was done at his Paleo-DNA Laboratory at Lakehead University. Fratpietro's team was able to successfully extract and sequence DNA from both the Pulaski Monument bones and from those of his maternal relative."According to them, the DNA results do match each other," Estabrook says, essentially confirming that the monument bones are indeed those of the Revolutionary War hero. These findings will be published in the academic journal Forensic Anthropology as well as featured in a Smithsonian Channel documentary that airs tonight at 8 p.m.With one mystery solved, the team is working on a second: why Pulaski's skeleton appeared female.One of Estabrook's hypotheses is that perhaps Pulaski had congenital adrenal hyperplasia, an inherited condition that produces too much of the male hormone androgen and can cause female genitalia that look more male. Casimir Pulaski was historically known to have been small in stature, and gracile in his features. Estabrook also notes that, if portraits of him are accurate, "he had enough androgens to produce facial hair, and the beginnings of male pattern baldness." And since he was baptized as a boy, he likely had what appeared to be male genitalia.Clinical literature describes considerable individual variation in the expression of any intersex condition, though, so Estabrook and her team are still working through potential explanations. This is complicated by the fact that there are no skeletal collections from people known to be intersex, even though it is quite common, with 1 in 1,000 people having some form of intersex condition.I asked Estabrook if the DNA work was able to explicate Pulaski's karyotype or specific condition, but she told me that mtDNA extraction itself was extremely challenging and that unfortunately no amplifiable nuclear DNA was detected by Fratpietro, so those avenues have been ruled out for now.For Estabrook, the Pulaski case has come full circle. "My mother's family was of Polish descent, and I grew up in an area where Pulaski passed through during the Revolutionary War, so I was aware of Pulaski growing up," she says. "He has not been completely forgotten, but my hope is that this work makes his story relevant to yet another group of people who have not imagined themselves represented in the history of the United States."While Pulaski was originally acclaimed as a martyr for American freedom, Estabrook notes, "now, in the 21st century, Pulaski might be one of the only individuals with a known biography - a truly heroic, selfless, and skillful leader - who was likely intersex."