This Skeleton Is The Oldest Known Ancient Olympic Athlete22692Just days before Christmas in 1959, construction workers in Taranto, Italy, came upon a large stone sarcophagus and pottery vessels in the black-figure style of ancient Greece. As was typical of the time, the bones within the tomb were ignored until bioarchaeologists got permission to examine them in the 1980s. What they found was the skeleton of quite possibly the oldest and only known athlete from the ancient Olympic games.It had been suspected since the man was found that he had been an athlete in life. At his left hand was an alabastron, a jar full of ointment that athletes used in ancient Greece. Surrounding his tomb were four Panathenaic amphorae dating to around 480 BC: with Athena on one side and depictions of athletic events on the other, these were just a few of the prizes that victors in the Panathenaic Games of ancient Athens won. Additionally, the discovery of this skeleton in Taranto was important: historical information suggests several famous athletes either came from or trained there. During antiquity, Taranto was part of Magna Graecia, or the Greek part of Italy. When bioarchaeologists finally began examining the “Atleta di Taranto” as he’s known in Italian, they found confirmation on the bones that match the historical and archaeological evidence of an athlete.The earliest research on the skeleton was done in the 1980s by Sara Bisel, who was already well-known for her work at Herculaneum, one of the towns destroyed by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius. Bisel found evidence of strong muscle markers — as muscles are anchored to bone, when a person works out and increases the size of their muscles, the underlying bone changes too. She told National Geographic News that “he must have been an all-around natural athlete — well-nourished, well- exercised, the personification of the Olympic spirit.”Additional research through the 1990s and early 2000s was done by a team of researchers headed by Gaspare Baggieri. They figured out that the man stood about 5’7??, or a bit above average for the time. He was strong and stocky, with broad shoulders and powerful muscles. Trace elements in his bones revealed a diet rich in seafood and meat, and the pristine condition of his teeth backed up a low-carb diet.Although this athlete was only in his late 20s or early 30s at the time of his death, he already suffered from degeneration of his shoulder joints. In particular, Baggieri has pointed out that wear-and-tear in the right shoulder joint plus large trapezius and deltoid muscles plus a right ulna (forearm bone) much bigger than the left all suggest this man was a world-class discus thrower. Further investigation by Baggieri and his team showed powerful calf muscles as well. In a biomechanical simulation, the team discovered that this ancient athlete was likely good at the long jump, able to leap as many as three meters.  The athletic competitions on the back of the Panathenaic amphorae buried with this man seem to confirm his prowess in these events. One of the amphorae depicts the pentathlon, which included the long jump, discus throw, javelin, wrestling and running. A second shows boxing or wrestling. And the third a four-horse chariot race. While a fourth amphora was found, it was shattered beyond reconstruction.The boxing amphora is interesting because there is no indication on this man’s skeleton that he competed in a sport that involved hand-to-hand combat or wrestling. His teeth were perfect. His jaw and nose were straight. A complete lack of broken, healed bones in his body means that this amphora is still a bit of a puzzle for archaeologists.The chariot-racing amphora is also somewhat mysterious. While Baggieri found some evidence of wear-and-tear on the man’s lower spine, which could suggest he drove chariots over bumpy ground, archaeologists suspect that this man may instead have been the race sponsor. Winnings in the Panathenaic games were considerable, totaling the equivalent of tens of thousands of dollars today, and perhaps this man invested some of that money into purchasing a chariot for someone else to race.  There is unfortunately no indication of why this athlete died so young. Baggieri suggests that he may already have been retired from competition, but given the robust nature of his bones, he couldn’t have retired much earlier than his death. In a time before antibiotics, of course, any number of diseases could have felled even the strongest athlete.There is also unfortunately no direct link between this athlete and the Olympics. But archaeologists infer his likely participation in them based on how successful he was at the Panathenaic Games. A champion at the games in Athens would almost certainly have been invited to compete in the Olympics. However, unlike the riches that accrued to victors at Athens, star athletes in the Olympics won only an olive branch. As this skeleton was found half a century ago, there is no longer any hope that botanical evidence could be preserved in the tomb to indicate if the man was buried with one or more olive branches.Still, the “Atleta di Taranto” remains the only skeleton ever found in association with the spoils of ancient Greek athletic competitions. He is therefore our earliest evidence of the physical make-up of ancient Olympic athletes.