Healthy Vampires Emerge From Graves In Medieval Polish Cemetery292749Archaeologists excavating a Medieval cemetery site in Ka?dus, Poland, recently discovered hundreds of graves — among them, they found 14 anti-vampire burials. Some of these people were decapitated, others buried face-down, and still more were weighted down with stones. One of the major theories about ancient “vampire” graves is that people buried in this way were unhealthy or disabled, causing their compatriots to treat them differently in death because of their physical differences in life. A team of researchers set out to investigate diseases apparent on the bones of these 14 so-called vampires.The cemetery at the site – which was known as Culmen in Latin — saw its first burial at the end of the 10th century AD. Culmen eventually became one of several capitals of Poland in the Medieval period, but it was burned to the ground at the beginning of the 13th century by the Teutonic Knights. Over 1,000 graves were found in the cemetery, which was excavated by a team of archaeologists under the supervision of Wojciech Chudziak from Nicolaus Copernicus University, and 14 of them showed evidence of “anti-vampire” practices.Vampire graves have been of particular interest to archaeologists and the public recently because of their strange nature. The burial practices undertaken to “cure” vampirism include special attempts to prevent the deceased from roaming the earth: sickles around the neck, decapitation, prone burial, and heavy stones placed on the body. While some scholars call these “vampire” graves, referring to the supposed nature of the occupant, others call them “anti-vampire” burial practices, referring to the burial treatment given to the person.Current scholarship has identified three main reasons that Medieval Europeans may have buried their friends and family as if they were vampires. First, many diseases common at the time — like tuberculosis — could cause people to be pale and to emit blood. Second, before people understood how diseases are transmitted by germs, they thought that vampires were sickening their family members even after their deaths. And third, people may simply have feared those who looked or acted differently than normal.After excavation, about half of the skeletons from Culmen were analyzed by archaeologists Magdalena Matczak and Tomasz Koz?owski, primarily to figure out which people were perceived as “vampires” and why. Matczak and Koz?owski investigated all skeletons from Culmen for evidence of any disease and presented their findings at the American Association of Physical Anthropologists conference in Atlanta in April.Their research revealed that 238 skeletons — about half of the entire cemetery population — showed evidence of disease. More importantly, there was a statistical correlation between those 14 “anti-vampire” graves and pathological lesions on the bones. “Most of the skeletons from anti-vampire burials,” Matczak and Koz?owski write, “have changes associated with scurvy, osteoperiostitis, degenerative lesions, and fractures.” Those are, they admit, fairly common afflictions, and most of the people with those diseases were given typical burials. Even people with slightly odd conditions like meningitis and trepanation (ancient skull surgery) were buried normally. As for the “vampires,” one showed evidence of scurvy, another was diagnosed with multiple myeloma (a cancer), and a third had severe degenerative joint disease.While Matczak and Koz?owski were looking for correlations between “vampires” and physical issues that could explain their anomalous burial treatment, they did not find them. “Contrary to previous research,” they write, “our analysis showed that people with tuberculosis, anemia, and scurvy were not [necessarily] given anti-vampire burials.” Given the high rate of pathology within the Culmen population, it’s likely that diseases and disabilities were perceived as within the range of normal for this community and therefore “would not have raised anxiety, fear, or negative perception of diseased people as vampires.”So why the odd burial, then? Matczak tells me that they don’t yet know, as it’s difficult to figure out from bones alone. It’s possible they are people “who died suddenly without Christian sacraments, like unbaptized children, people who committed suicide, babies born with teeth, or newly postpartum mothers.” But much more information is needed. “The problem of who and why certain people were regarded as vampires needs to be investigated further using an interdisciplinary approach,”      Matczak tells me. As more research is done on Medieval cemeteries in Europe, archaeologists will eventually be able to make sense of these strange vampire burials.