Why Was This Medieval Sicilian Stabbed In The Back And Buried Face-Down?2987On the edge of a Roman villa in Sicily, an unusual skeleton was discovered: buried face-down, the Medieval man appeared to have been stabbed in the back at least six times. Archaeologists investigating the burial used 3D modeling and CT scans to figure out what happened in the last moments of the man's life.The burial, dating to the late 11th century AD, was discovered initially in 2013 during excavation in Piazza Armerina. No Medieval cemetery has been found, meaning this person was disposed of within the ruins of the abandoned Roman town. The unusual burial style immediately intrigued archaeologists because the skeleton, of a man in his 30s when he died, was face-down in a shallow pit without any grave goods. Additionally, his feet were very close together, leading the researchers to believe they may have been tied. Although ancient Sicily was marked by a variety in burial traditions owing to Jewish, Christian, and Muslim occupation, this peculiar grave warranted further analysis.Writing this week in the International Journal of Osteoarchaeology, a group of archaeologists from the University of Palermo, led by Roberto Miccichè, detail the injury pattern they observed on the man's bones, which they think hold clues to his death. Using 3D and CT scanning, Miccichè and colleagues demonstrate that only a violent stabbing could have created the marks they found.Specifically, the archaeologists found that "the sternum bore at least six clear signs of penetrating stab wounds that resulted in the compression of the outer table of bone and left on the sternum an accurate shape of the blade tip used." Most likely, the man was stabbed to death with a close-combat weapon such as a knife or dagger that had just one sharp edge.Since the cut marks were on the back of the sternum, this suggests "multiple stab attacks from the back of the victim that fully pierced the thorax," the researchers note. Looking even more closely at the sternum, "a large fragment of bone that left a chop mark appearance" shows how "the blade was probably twisted, creating leverage to remove the bone fragment," they conclude. A lack of evidence of bone remodeling means the injuries occurred close to the time of death. Interestingly, no other bones of the chest showed any evidence of cut marks.Using a 3D virtual model, Miccichè and colleagues hypothesized the mechanism of the homicidal action. The initial entry point of the bladed weapon was in the right upper part of the man's back, between the third and fourth ribs, and he was stabbed numerous times without his assailant fully withdrawing the weapon. The stabbing trauma may have punctured his right lung and almost certainly punctured a large vessel such as the aorta or a heart chamber, causing the man's death."On the basis of this traumatic pattern," the archaeologists write, "it is possible to rule out a cause of death connected with usual warfare practice or with typical hand-to-hand combat." The repeated stabbing "occurred not during a chaotic fight or a battle, but in a more controlled situation such as an execution," they conclude. While the victim was likely kneeling when stabbed, Miccichè and colleagues could not provide a clear motivation behind the action, "as it could have originated either from a judicial or criminal environment."This unusual burial and traumatic injury pattern suggest that the man may have been killed during a chaotic time period. "We would like to cautiously propose," the archaeologists write, "that our case falls within the period of crisis and social reorganization that took place in Sicily in the aftermath of the Norman conquest of 1061 AD."The injury pattern seen on this man's sternum is, so far, unique in bioarchaeology. More importantly, however, the case sheds light on deviant burial practices in ancient Sicily and on interpersonal violence at a critical time period of historic social change.