Kids' Skulls Reveal Traumatic Death In Ancient France3254Within the Michelet cemetery in Lisieux, France, archaeologists discovered over 100 children and nearly 1,000 adults dating to the late Roman to early Medieval periods. Three of those children, all between the ages of 2 and 7, had severe head injuries that almost certainly killed them. Archaeologists studied the remains in order to figure out whether these were accidental injuries, purposeful attacks, or child abuse.During the Roman period, the area of modern-day Lisieux was called Noviomagus Lexoviorum. Established in the first century AD, it became a fortified castrum after Anglo-Saxon raids in the third century. Additional raids may have occurred in the fourth through fifth centuries, and archaeological evidence in general suggests that injuries to women and children were common in these sorts of raids. The Michelet children, however, have injuries to the front of their skulls, not the back, as would be expected if they were fleeing in a raid.In an article forthcoming in the International Journal of Osteoarchaeology, bioarchaeologist Sarah Timmins of McMaster University and her colleagues lay out the evidence for the violent injuries that likely caused these three kids’ deaths.One child, about 2 years old at death, dates to the Late Roman period. This child suffered a penetrating wound to the side of his or her head. Two additional children date to the early Medieval (Merovingian) period. A 3- to 7-year-old child also suffered a penetrating wound but to the front of the skull, and a 3- to 4-year-old child had a blunt force injury to the front, as well as a penetrating wound to the side of the head. All of these injuries are severe and almost certainly resulted in the children’s deaths.Childhood was likely difficult for many past populations, so the finding of trauma is not unexpected, but the form of the injuries piqued the researchers’ attention. Cranial trauma in children is relatively rare, accounting for less than 2% of fractures reported in modern medical literature. The causes in contemporary children include falls, vehicle or bicycle accidents, sports injuries, and child abuse. Given the time period of these ancient skeletons, motor vehicle accidents are clearly out as an explanation. So what historically relevant activities could have caused them?Timmins and colleagues scoured the historical and archaeological literature to figure out the context of the injuries. Raiding is not a likely explanation because, even though raids are known from this general time period, they tend to result in trauma to the back of the head, not the front and sides. In addition, the Michelet children were buried normally rather than hurriedly or in mass graves that resulted from a raid. Child abuse is also not a good explanation, as these children’s primary injuries appear to be fatal ones. That is, in studies of child abuse in the present and the past, there is generally a period of abuse prior to death. The single, traumatic injuries on these ancient children’s heads do not fit a pattern of abuse.Nevertheless, the penetrating cranial injuries are not accidental, according to the researchers, and rather indicate interpersonal violence inflicted with considerable force, possibly with a wide, thin implement – perhaps a bladed weapon or projectile. “Modern and bioarchaeological studies suggest that populations under stress, including social, political, environmental, or economic pressures, often suffer from increased rates of violence, including violence towards children,” Timmins and colleagues say. A potential social or political upheaval in northern Gaul around this time could have created conditions in which these children suffered violent interactions. However, since “education and harsh discipline were both considered beneficial for the developing child,” the researchers note, “physical discipline was not uncommon for children during this period” and could explain the fatal injuries.Bioarchaeologist Sîan Halcrow of the University of Otago specializes in the study of children and childhood in the past, and says that “this paper is one of the few studies of physical trauma of infants and children in the literature; this type of research is difficult because of the small number of infants and children usually found on archaeological sites.” Halcrow is further impressed that Timmins and colleagues combined “biomedical information on skeletal trauma and presented it within the context of social-political information and an historical understanding of how children were treated.”While three of the ancient children in the Michelet cemetery appear to have died from their injuries, a fourth survived. A 4- to 5-year-old child from the late Roman period sustained a blunt force injury to the side of the head. A small, circular depression, it was well-healed at the time of the child’s death. The researchers, though, conclude that it was likely accidental in nature.This analysis of cranial trauma in ancient children speaks to the need for further research so that we can better understand both the lives of kids in the past and the effects that social and political strife have on some of the most vulnerable members of any population.