Mass Grave From War Of 1812 Gives Archaeologists First Evidence Of Buckshot Injuries35623The night of June 6, 1813, was dark and chaotic. As American troops advanced into the Niagara Peninsula, a battle ensued between them and the British army attempting to raid their camp at Stoney Creek in Ontario. Unable to coordinate a standard infantry line, both sides launched into close?range, hand?to?hand combat. Given the atypical nature of the battle, a group of archaeologists set out to see if the injuries found on two dozen skeletons in a mass grave from this War of 1812 skirmish were also atypical.The Battle of Stoney Creek mass grave was excavated in 1998 and 1999. Containing 2,701 fragments, the collection represents at least 24 people who were likely hastily buried following the raid. The British lost 23 men, and the Americans 17, with over 200 more injured, missing, or captured. Previous studies on the excavated skeletons using stable isotope analysis revealed some of the soldiers had a more European diet, while others had a more North American, corn?based diet, suggesting both sides may have used the same grave to bury their dead.And in three of the individuals’ hip bones, there were injuries that seemed to have resulted from muskets.To solve the question of the hip injuries from the Stoney Creek mass grave, a Canadian team of researchers led by Laura Lockau at McMaster University launched an experiment that sounds like an episode of MythBusters, in order to replicate both the people and the firearms in use during the battle. They report their findings in an article in the April issue of the Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports. After procuring pig shoulders from a local butcher, Lockau and colleagues covered them with center loin pork chops and belly pork to simulate the bone, muscle, fat, and skin in the area of the hip blade. They chose modern but era?appropriate fabrics as a way to simulate the typical British military uniforms, which consisted of a linen shirt and trousers as well as a heavy wool coat, and they layered the fabrics on the pig parts. Voilà – the researchers created what they call “proxy buttocks” of the soldiers. But what about the ammo?In the War of 1812, the most common weapon was the smoothbore flintlock musket, which was usually loaded with musket balls but sometimes with buckshot ammunition. While musket balls were large and spherical, buckshot was much smaller — about half the size. Both types of ammunition, though, deformed on impact with bone and had significant destructive potential as they penetrated the body. The modern forensic literature is full of studies of high?velocity projectiles and their effects on bone, but the effects of historic?era guns like the musket on bone are practically unknown.   With six “soldiers” tied down on each tray, Lockau and colleagues used a modern reproduction of the Springfield 1795 pattern .69 caliber smoothbore flintlock musket to figure out what damage it could do to flesh and bone. The ammunition they chose also replicated what would have been used in the battle: paper? wrapped cartridges containing a charge of gunpowder and projectiles all tied together with string. They tested both “buck and ball” — which consisted of a larger musket ball along with three smaller buckshot pellets — as well as buckshot, which included a dozen of the small pellets, at a distance of just over 9 meters. Then they x?rayed their “proxy buttocks.”Lockau and colleagues found in the experimental pig bones lesions related to the buckshot impacts, which appear as horseshoe?shaped or circular lesions and are similar to the appearance of musket ball injuries. “This corresponds well,” the researchers note, “with the fact that musket ball and buckshot ammunition are the same shape, and are constructed of the same material, with the only difference between them being their diameter.” That is, musket balls and buckshot pellets make similarly shaped impacts to bone, but buckshot is much smaller.Importantly, the injuries they found on the hip bones from the Battle of Stoney Creek match well with the experimental buckshot injuries in size. “This is the first time of which we are aware,” they note, “that skeletal lesions attributable to buckshot ammunition have been identified in archaeological material.”Given the long history of musket use in war, it may be surprising that buckshot injuries have not been identified before. But Lockau and colleagues explain that buckshot is much rarer as ammunition than musket balls, because it was not used by the British army in the War of 1812 and because shortly thereafter, firearms with rifled barrels started replacing muskets as the weapon of choice. Further, buckshot injuries are all or nothing — either they cause only slight injury that someone recovers from or they are deadly. People who were only slightly wounded by buckshot would heal and have injuries that look different than fatal ones.The spread of the lesions on the skeletons from the Stoney Creek mass grave mean the buckshot injuries these men suffered were likely inflicted at close range, but given the fact that they didn’t penetrate bone, the shots were moving at a comparatively low velocity. Lockau and colleagues think that interference from an external factor — something or someone in the midst of the fray — could have altered the flight path of the buckshot and caused the lessened injury to the bones.Although some of the individuals from this mass grave were tested for dietary isotopes in an attempt to learn their origins, the jumble of bones means their names will likely never be put with their remains. One further intriguing detail of this study, though, is the fact that only the American army issued buckshot ammunition during the War of 1812. Does that mean the dead soldiers with buckshot injuries were British soldiers or even Canadian militiamen? It’s possible. But as the battle was in the dead of night, with chaos everywhere, Lockau and colleagues caution that these conditions “make the occurrence of friendly fire probable and introduce further ambiguity as to which side these individuals died fighting for.”Bioarchaeologist Sonia Zakrzewski of the University of Southampton was not involved with this study but was nevertheless impressed by it. “This was a fabulously novel way of attempting to reconstruct the types of trauma that one might find on bone as a result of musket fire,” she told me. “There are clearly some amusing issues that arise surrounding the ‘proxy buttocks,’ but this study represents a huge degree of detailed analysis of the thousands of bone fragments,” Zakrzewski continued. “The research is historically very important due to the additional emotional connection that warlike and violent situations engender.”For Lockau, not only was this analysis a connection to the historical record of Canada, but als this type of experimental study is crucial for advancing the field of bioarchaeology, Lockau tells me, especially “in order to answer questions about how the injuries might have been inflicted.” Being able to replicate the injuries in a controlled environment allowed her and her colleagues to correlate unknown archaeological injuries with known modern ones. “Hopefully,” Lockau concludes, “these results from the Battle of Stoney Creek can then be applied to injuries in other skeletal collections for which this type of detailed historical information is not available.”