Young Woman With Disabilities Found In Artifact?Packed Bronze Age Burial3740Unassuming burials dot the landscape of Bronze Age Bahrain, with a couple artifacts and offerings of food for the afterlife, but one grave stands out. A young woman with a deformed arm and perfect teeth was laid to rest with a dozen elaborate vessels, many imported from quite a distance. Her bones are telling researchers a story of resilience in the face of lifelong disability. The skeleton is part of a collection of 34 from Dilmun, an ancient polity that extended from modern?day Kuwait to Qatar, centered on the main island of Bahrain. An important center that controlled trade in the Persian Gulf, Dilmun was also considered sacred to the Sumerians. Dating to the early period — around 2000?1800 BC — the burials were made at a time when Dilmun was experiencing great cultural growth.As part of the Dilmun Bioarchaeology Project, which is based at the Phoebe A. Hearst Museum of Anthropology at UC Berkeley, Alexis Boutin of Sonoma State University has been analyzing these skeletons for the past five years. Her work focuses on the idea of personhood in the past, or how skeletons can tell us the stories of their lives. One particular skeleton from Dilmun is the focus of her new article in the March issue of the International Journal of Paleopathology: the young woman whose physical anomalies would certainly have been noticeable at a glance.      The Bronze Age woman’s right humerus is unusually shaped and quite short. Based on its appearance, and backed by x?rays, Boutin discovered that the woman likely suffered from a condition called humerus varus deformity. The growth plate of the bone fused prematurely, causing the bone to fail to grow as long as it could, and the rotator cuff tendons pulled on it as the woman used her arm, causing the head of the bone to rotate too far inward. Her right hand would have faced away from her body when it hung at her side. Because the arm bone is severely shortened, Boutin concluded that it was most likely damaged during the neonatal or early childhood period.In addition to the arm issue, the woman’s leg bones showed evidence of injury as well. Her femora were rotated inward, which caused decreased range of motion in her hip joints, and caused her knees to rotate inward. She would have walked pigeon?toed, knees brushing together and feet pointed at one another. There is no indication when these injuries occurred, but they appear to have been acquired during life rather than being genetic in nature.Boutin stresses that understanding disability in the past requires analysis of all possible lines of evidence. We cannot assume based on our own cultural experiences how disabled individuals were treated in another time and place. In this case, the woman’s teeth and the artifacts she was buried with appear to speak to her special standing in the community.Unlike other young adults from the cemetery, this woman had nearly perfect teeth. She had just one cavity, her teeth were barely worn, and she had little evidence of childhood stress, which can show up as lines or pits in the enamel. Her diet almost certainly deviated from the norm. Also unlike others from Dilmun, this young woman was buried with 12 vessels. A small alabaster jug and a bitumen?lined vessel are unique and both appear to have been imported at least 1,000 kilometers away from Iran or Iraq. “This young woman was set apart not only by her bodily non?normativity,” Boutin writes, “but also by the elaboration of her mortuary treatment.”Bones can tell researchers not just about a person’s death but also about the overall course of her life. This Bronze Age woman “seems to have suffered from a litany of ailments that struck at different ages and with varying duration,” Boutin notes. “The amount of therapeutic and palliative care, support, and accommodation that she required would have waxed and waned throughout her youth, but been most acute during infancy and early adolescence.” Although she likely did not require healthcare during her young adulthood, it is clear that her parents or other caregivers provided help as she grew.Using the bone evidence to put herself in the woman’s shoes, Boutin writes that “she had probably grown accustomed to coping with” her injuries, which would have become more obvious during puberty, when her growth spurt would fail to help her right arm grow. “She may have needed support not only for her physical health, but also her mental well?being, as she came to terms with the physical anomalies that differentiated her visibly from the surrounding population.”Trying to understand disability in the past is quite complicated, as researchers do not often have historical records to guide their interpretations of physical differences. Boutin emphasizes the need to put aside Western perceptions, to recognize that disability may be just one facet of a person’s identity, and to take a life?span approach to figuring out how a disability occurred and how it affected a person throughout life. Rather than focusing purely on a medical diagnosis for disability, it is important to have a more “humanizing view of past personhoods,” she says.Do the grave goods reflect this young woman’s specialized knowledge? Her high cultural or economic status? An attempt by the people burying her to appease vengeful gods who cursed her with a disability? More likely, Boutin concludes, “her non?normative body was perceived in both positive and negative ways by her contemporaries.”   While we will never know everything about the life of this young Bronze Age woman and how she dealt with her physical disability, Boutin makes it clear that “she was held in unusual regard by members of her community.”