Earliest Case Of Scurvy In Ancient Egypt Detected By Archaeologists3894Earlier this week, it was reported that an infant in Spain was diagnosed with scurvy due to a diet of almond?based formula. Irritability, bone loss, and low vitamin C led doctors to conclude that scurvy, a disease generally associated with old?timey pirate stories, had caused the child’s issues. Scurvy is uncommon today thanks to vitamin?enriched foods and the availability of fresh fruits and vegetables, but it is unclear how widespread it was in the past. A case of scurvy from Predynastic Egypt was also published by archaeologists this week, providing clues to the antiquity of the disease and the way it affected infants’ bones.The Aswan?Kom Ombo Archaeological Project, directed by Maria Carmela Gatto and Antonio Curci, led the excavation of a settlement and cemetery at a site called Nag el?Qarmila, just north of Aswan, which represents the Predynastic Naqada culture. Among nearly a dozen skeletons was an infant around a year old, dating back to 3800 to 3600 BC, who had areas of porous bone scattered throughout the skeleton. While human bones normally have holes in them, so that nerves and blood can supply them in a living person, an abnormal amount of porosity almost always indicates that something is wrong.The child’s skull was virtually covered in patches of porous bone, including the jaw and the eye orbits. Additional areas were seen on the arm bones and, most dramatically, on the upper leg bones, which also showed new bone formation suggestive of bone inflammation. The suite of lesions that were present on the child’s bones led bioarchaeologist Mindy Pitre of St. Lawrence University, along with collaborators Robert Stark and Maria Carmela Gatto, to question whether the disease they were seeing was something like rickets, anemia, leukemia, malaria, or scurvy.In their recently published article in the International Journal of Paleopathology, Pitre and colleagues delve into the location and appearance of the lesions in order to create a differential diagnosis. They ruled out rickets because of a lack of bowing of the lower legs. They ruled out anemia because the lesions in the eye orbits don’t match that condition, and ruled out leukemia for a similar reason. Evidence of malaria in ancient skeletons has been found as far back as the Predynastic period, but this child did not have lesions on the spine that are one of the characteristics of the disease. While it is possible that the child suffered from more than one condition at the same time, the lesions on its skeleton “fit well with the type and pattern of lesions of subadult scurvy” discussed in the research literature, Pitre and colleagues write.Essentially, what happens in scurvy is that insufficient vitamin C disrupts normal formation of bone. Because scurvy also affects blood vessel walls, they are prone to break or hemorrhage during movements like chewing and even looking around. Bone is a living tissue, and it tries to respond to the hemorrhaging by becoming more porous or by creating new bone. The porous lesions Pitre and colleagues found on the child’s skull along with the new bone formation on the leg bones are therefore strongly suggestive of scurvy. This child “may be the first and, thus far, the earliest differentially diagnosed case of subadult scurvy recognized from an ancient Egyptian context,” they write.But why did an infant get scurvy? Ancient Egyptian women typically breastfed their infants (or wet?nursed others’ infants) for up to three years. If this child’s mother or wet?nurse lacked vitamin C in her own diet, the child could develop scurvy too if not fed supplemental foods. There were plenty of foods in ancient Egypt that could provide necessary vitamin C to the diet, but there is also written evidence from Egyptian medial papyri for treatments for a disease that is almost certainly scurvy. If Egyptians were eating primarily meat, dairy, fish, and cooked or preserved plants, their diets would be quite low in vitamin C. Additionally, a secondary condition such as malaria could have factored into the child’s health, making the child more prone to reduced absorption of vitamin C.There is no direct evidence of exactly what this ancient Egyptian child died from. Pitre and colleagues note, though, that “complications from infection, cachexia [wasting syndrome], and/or cardiac and myocardial impairment often seen in cases of scurvy may have contributed to his/her mortality.” Although it is just one infant skeleton among many from Predynastic Egypt, they conclude that the child “contributes to our understanding of the antiquity of ascorbic acid deficiency in the Old World and suggests that regardless of the fertile nature of the area, dietary insufficiencies such as scurvy were possible.”