What Does An Ancient Skull From Tennessee Tell Archaeologists About The Evolution of Syphilis?39260An isolated burial site in far eastern Tennessee that was excavated in the 1970s has recently been reexamined by archaeologists interested in the origin and evolution of treponemal diseases, including syphilis.At the Wilhoite site along the Nolichucky River, Native American remains dating to the Early Woodland period -- 900 BC to 200 AD -- were found by amateur archaeologists four decades ago. At the time, prior to appropriate legislation that protected archaeological resources and Native remains, many skeletons were lost to private collections. In 2002, however, the Frank H. McClung Museum in Knoxville received a donation of a number of artifacts and one skull with its lower jaw, labeled Burial G, from Wilhoite.Despite the lack of a full skeleton, bioarchaeologists Tracy Betsinger of SUNY Oneonta and Maria O. Smith from Illinois State University decided to investigate what remained of the middle-aged man because of the numerous indications of disease on his bones.Writing in the upcoming March issue of the International Journal of Paleopathology, Betsinger and Smith first noted that the man "exhibits a range of pathological changes that provide a window into his health status." He had decent dental health, which meshed with what is archaeologically known about the Early Woodland period -- it was an era in which Native Americans did not consume cavity-causing maize intensively. The man did, however, have indications on his teeth that he went through a period of disease or malnutrition as a child and possibly also as an adult, and he was suffering from osteoarthritis in the right side of his jaw at the time of his death.But what really piqued the interest of Betsinger and Smith was the pock-marked appearance of the man's skull. This is known to archaeologists as caries sicca, a reaction in bone to gummatous lesions, or non-cancerous growths of the soft tissue. The presence of caries sicca on the skull indicates to archaeologists that a person suffered from one or more of the treponemal diseases, a suite of infections that include pinta, yaws, bejel, and venereal syphilis.Indications of treponemal disease are well known in the New World prior to Columbus, particularly in the east and southwest of the U.S., but there is currently no clear evidence that venereal syphilis existed in the Americas until after European colonization. Skeletons with bejel or yaws - the other two treponemal diseases that cause bony reactions - are not found very often in archaeological settings in the ancient U.S. Most of the cases come from more recent time periods, after people began to domesticate plants and animals, and to stay in one place for longer periods of time. This increase in sedentary living presumably led to the evolution of a variety of diseases and the increased opportunity to pass them on.The skull lesions that archaeologists see in these pre-Columbian examples of treponemal disease are typically slight, because the diseases yaws and bejel do not always produce the serious bone involvement necessary to create a caries sicca appearance in the way that venereal syphilis commonly does. This man from ancient Tennessee, though, has a severe, extensive caries sicca reaction to some form of treponemal disease.Betsinger and Smith write that this "case stands in contrast to the assumption that severe cases are necessarily late prehistoric [in date] or in association with intensive agriculture. This individual is exceptional because no case like it has been reported in the contiguous United States and only in a few late-prehistoric cases in North America."Because of the few remains available and lack of archaeological context for the site at which this middle-age man was found, Betsinger and Smith are unsure what caused the severe reaction. One possibility is that he acquired non-venereal treponemal disease in early childhood; by the time he died, the disease could have progressed such that it caused dramatic reactions in his skull. Another possibility is that this man was part of a group with no immunological response to a disease brought in by others, and therefore had a severe reaction where others with greater exposure would have had a less severe one.The non-tropical location of the site in Tennessee suggests the man suffered from bejel, or non-venereal endemic syphilis, which is actually a chronic skin condition. Without penicillin or other antibiotic treatment, bejel can progress from a simple mouth sore to the gummatous lesions that erode skull bones and cause the caries sicca formation.As archaeological excavation and diagnosis of ancient human remains gets more accurate and more efficient, the antiquity and evolution of diseases such as the treponematoses (pinta, yaws, bejel, and venereal syphilis) will eventually become clearer. The analysis of even isolated skulls such as this one from the Wilhoite site in Tennessee can therefore contribute to a broader understanding of disease transmission in the pre-Columbian world.