Skinned, Carved And Boiled Skull Cup Reveals Cannibalism In Neolithic Spain4004Deep within a Spanish cave, archaeologists have found the remains of seven ancient people whose bodies appear to have been skinned, carved, and boiled in what may have been an extensive funerary practice involving cannibalism.The skeletons discovered in Cueva de El Toro in Málaga, Spain, date to the Early Neolithic period, or around 5300 to 4800 BC. They represent at least four adults and three kids, whose bones present clear evidence of cutting, scraping, chopping, and smashing soon after their deaths.Writing in the American Journal of Physical Anthropology, archaeologist Jonathan Santana of Durham University and his colleagues at the Universidad de Cantabria and the Universidad de La Laguna detail their discovery of a skull cup among these human remains.“Skull cups are post-mortem processed heads that display signs of defleshing, breakage by percussion, and careful retouching of the broken borders,” the researchers explain. Specifically, one of the human skulls from Cueva de El Toro was modified into a cup “by careful paring away of skin, fragmentation of the facial skeleton and base of the skull, and controlled percussion of the edges of the calotte to achieve a regular shape.” That is, the head was first skinned, then carved.Other examples of skull cups have been found dating to the Neolithic period. Santana and colleagues note that three caves in southern Iberia have produced both skull cups and evidence of cannibalism, while the site of El Mirador cave in northern Spain had six skull cups that may have been created after brain extraction for a kind of “gastronomic cannibalism.”The Cueva de El Toro skull cup fits in with previous examples, but the archaeologists also suggest that it was subjected to boiling water. Santana and colleagues noticed “pot polish” on the skull cup, which occurs when “bones are boiled in pottery vessels whose inner surface is abrasive, leading to polished facets.” The boiling was likely the last step in the creation of the skull cup, aimed at thoroughly cleaning the bone.The reason for the Neolithic cannibalism, however, is much less clear. Santana and colleagues present three possible explanations: survival cannibalism in the face of famine or other resource loss; aggressive cannibalism related to extreme inter-group violence; and funerary cannibalism as a facet of a multi-stage burial practice.Since there is no evidence of starvation in the archaeological record of Neolithic Spain, the archaeologists cautiously rule that explanation out. There is also no evidence in the Cueva de El Toro remains of violent death, so aggressive cannibalism related to warfare is also unlikely.Bones at Cueva de El Toro were found in a domestic context, which suggests that all of the manipulation of the bodies may have been related to a complex funeral practice. The biological relationship among some of the bodies provides additional evidence that the dead may have been processed by their loved ones. Although the skull cup person did not have any familial relationship with other remains, two samples from other skeletons show a first-degree maternal relationship.“Evidence from Cueva de El Toro suggests that cannibalism was conducted in the domestic sphere, likely following ritualized practices where the skull cup could have played a part,” Santana and colleagues suggest. Based on the other evidence of skull cups from Neolithic Spain, the researchers think that this practice was widespread among the first farming communities.Katie Tucker, a bioarchaeologist at the University of Winchester who was not involved in this research, told me that she thinks this study “presents very compelling evidence for multiple modifications of human cranial remains.” However, she is “unconvinced that this was due to cannibalism rather than to a complex process of primary and secondary funerary practices.” Based on the skeletal evidence, Tucker is unsure why Santana and colleagues suggest cannibalism specifically rather than just post-mortem defleshing and modification of the bodies.Archaeologist Arwa Kharobi of Bournemouth University similarly told me she appreciated the multifaceted approach the researchers took in analyzing the skull cup and other remains from Cueva de El Toro. Kharobi, who was not involved in this work, notes that “it is difficult to truly assess the case as one of cannibalism,” since known cases are so few and since cannibalism is a complex process itself. She suggests that additional analyses, such as strontium isotope work, could help the authors better understand the origin of the person whose head became a skull cup.For their part, Santana and colleagues admit that interpretation of the bodies is difficult, particularly “given the extremely complex nature of some caves used in the Early Neolithic.” The skull cup “may be a trophy head that belonged to an enemy, from the same or another group, or otherwise a relic of a preeminent member of this group.”This sort of funerary processing or cannibalism of close relatives may seem odd to some of us. But Kharobi suggests we think of these practices within an ancient context, where it may have “reflected positive social interactions like sharing and eating, rather than solely death and destruction of the bodies of the group.”In the end, Santana told me that he thinks that perhaps “a critical and traumatic situation happened at the end of the Early Neolithic in this area. It is possible that cannibalism was one of the social responses to deal with the new situation, in terms of symbolism and ritual, or as a consequence of violence between different groups.”