Cannibalism Is Much Older Than Drew Barrymore's Santa Clarita Diet4236The Santa Clarita Diet, a horror-comedy TV show revolving around zombies and cannibalism, premieres tonight on Netflix. But archaeological and historical evidence around the world shows that these gruesome activities are nothing new. Here is a sampling of evidence of cannibalism from around the world.Ancient Mesoamerican ‘Longpig’ RecipeHuman bones found near Mexico City dating to 700-500 BC show evidence of cannibalism, and in 2015, archaeologists even recreated the recipe used to cook human flesh. It seems that, after the hunks of humans were butchered, some were grilled while others were boiled. The boiled ones were also yellow in color, meaning they were cooked with annatto, pipián, or chilis.Cannibalism at JamestownArchaeologists at Jamestown Colony in Virginia found evidence of cannibalism in 2013. The skeleton of a teenage girl revealed cuts and chops to the head that strongly suggest someone was trying to open her skull and eat her brain. Her bones were found alongside butchered horse and dog bones, just more evidence that the Jamestown settlers were desperate for food in the winter of 1609-1610. Not only that, but there is an historical record that mentions cannibalism: George Percy, president of Jamestown at the time, wrote that “As to digge upp deade corpes outt of graves and to eate them. And some have Licked upp the Bloode which hathe fallen from their weake fellowes.”    Canadian Cannibalism in the 19th CenturyIn 2015, archaeologists discovered evidence of cannibalism on one of the bodies from the Franklin Expedition, a team of sailors who set out in 1845 to find the Northwest Passage. Not only that, but they found two different stages of cannibalism — early stage, as evidenced by knife marks made when flesh and muscle were being removed, but also end stage, when the men were so desperate for food that they boiled their compatriot’s bones in a soup pot.Famine in Early 20th Century RussiaThe winter of 1921-1922 was unbelievably tough in Bolshevik Russia. Having just come out of six years of World War I and two years of a civil war, there was a severe famine that killed an estimated 5 million people. Some of the peasants who did not die had to resort to cannibalism — mostly of the people who had already died, but there are historical reports of people killing other people simply to survive. The image at the top of this post is from that horrific famine.  Cannibalism TodayWe make movies and television shows about cannibalism and zombies today because the sorts of famine known in past centuries no longer affect the U.S. But even though cannibalism is not necessary for survival and even though it is illegal, that doesn’t mean it doesn’t happen — Wikipedia has helpfully collected a huge list of 21st century cannibalistic activities.Ten episodes of Santa Clarita Diet are streaming now on Netflix, so you too can binge on cannibalism!