How Grave Robbers And Medical Students Helped Dehumanize 19th Century Blacks And The Poor5631The history of autopsy and dissection of human bodies in the United States may seem like an innocuous topic, a necessary means to study life and its inevitable end. But in the 19th century, the vast majority of people who were dissected and autopsied were socially and economically marginalized groups. Bioarchaeologists have recently turned their attention to the skeletal remains of people who were dissected or autopsied, revealing evidence that socioeconomic inequality experienced during life extended into death.Postmortem Trauma Or Violence?Discussions of postmortem trauma to human remains are made within the boundaries of a concept called structural violence. This sociological idea explains, for example, the relationship between poverty and chronic infectious diseases like tuberculosis in modern groups as well as the relationship between skeletal markers of health stress and social status in ancient populations. Sometimes, structural inequalities not only persist within a society but are codified into law, so the elite stay that way and the non?elite become more down?trodden. Within 19th century America, the adoption of new anatomy laws essentially made the lives and deaths of the poor and socially marginalized groups worse.Bioarchaeologist Ken Nystrom of SUNY New Paltz has been researching structural violence for years and became interested in the history of dissection in the U.S. In a recently published article, he says that he “would characterize the development and passing of anatomy laws that made it legal to dissect unclaimed bodies from almshouses and the resulting psychological stress associated with the fear of dissection as manifestations of structural violence.”Criminals And ResurrectionistsBut what’s the harm in dissection? Nystrom explains that “in the early 16th and 17th centuries in both Britain and its North American colonies, dissection was meted out as postmortem punishment for executed criminals.” In Britain, King Henry VIII offered executed criminals to surgeons in the 1540s, and the colony of Massachusetts was the first to draft statutes that allowed dissection of criminals in 1641. A law written in 1789 in New York state specifically said that a judge could add dissection as a penalty for sentencing in particular crimes.The 19th century saw a boom in medical education, with the number of American med schools increasing from 4 to 160. This meant the legal supply of cadavers was suddenly insufficient and created demand for “resurrected” bodies in both Britain (think: Burke and Hare) and the U.S. “The public anxiety and fear generated by grave robbing boiled over on a number of occasions,” Nystrom says, and led to a series of “anatomy riots”–at least 20 between 1785 and 1855.A group of free blacks in 1787 petitioned the city of New York to stop people from robbing bodies from their graves in the Negro Burying Ground but were unsuccessful. When the body of a white woman was discovered stolen a year later, New Yorkers took action and rioted. “The City Hospital was ransacked,” Nystrom notes, “medical students took refuge in the city jail, and six people were killed in confrontations.”New York, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Maine, and Ohio all passed anti?grave robbing laws in the first half of the 19th century. They didn’t work. Even worse, the laws were particularly ineffective “for those groups generally targeted for such activity: African Americans, Native Americans, immigrants, and the poor,” Nystrom explains. In an attempt to distance themselves from grave?robbing, medical professionals instead became interested in the growing social issue of poverty.Dissection Of The American PoorBy the 19th century, these anatomical riders to legal punishments were extended to the poor and indigent, who formed a new group of people whose bodies could be exploited. Early in this century, widespread industrialization and urbanization contributed to an unprecedented rise in unemployment and cycles of poverty throughout the U.S. Many populous states began to treat poverty as a social problem, splitting people into “able?bodied” and “impotent” poor. While the latter were considered worthy of pity and help, the former were considered lazy. Almshouses were set up to support the “worthy” poor. At first, these institutions seemed to work, but by the mid?1800s, Nystrom says, “living conditions were deplorable” and “exposed the poor to conditions that directly and negatively affected [their] health.”  Enter Jeremy Bentham. The famed 19th century philosopher saw a link between changing laws regarding the poor and the study of anatomy. He argued that poorhouses should be punitive, designed to dissuade people from seeking assistance, and that the only value in a dead body is in its use to the living. Laws passed at this time to stop grave robbing and advance medical science in essence reframed the idea of dissection as a deterrent against indigence.The British Warburton Anatomy Act of 1832 allowed the unclaimed bodies of people who died in taxpayer?funded institutions–almshouses, mental institutions, jails, charity clinics–to be given to anatomical schools for dissection, Carlina de la Cova, a bioarchaeologist at the University of South Carolina who also studies dissection, told me. “This British law made its way across the pond and became the standard anatomical legislation in the U.S. for over 60 years.” Dissection of the poor and marginalized was quickly popularized.Several factors specific to this historical time and place converged in the practice of dissection of the poor, according to Nystrom. “The changing societal perception of poverty,” he says, “coupled with the demand for cadavers generated by the emergence and expansion of the medical profession in the United States, created a context in which the poor became vulnerable to the postmortem violence of dissection.”Almshouse Cemetery ResearchNystrom has been working with two cemeteries from almshouses in order to get a clearer picture of dissection practices in the 19th century. The Albany County (NY) Almshouse was associated with the Albany Medical Center from 1826 to 1926. Almshouse inmates joined in death individuals from local hospitals and prisons, as well as unclaimed bodies from the city. Nystrom learned that 51 individuals’ skeletons– two?thirds of whom were male–revealed cut marks suggestive of dissection, surgical practice, or experimentation.The Erie County (NY) Poorhouse opened in 1851 and was associated with the Buffalo Medical Center. This cemetery included nearly 100 empty coffins or wood logs in place of bodies. Perhaps families eventually claimed the bodies, but “it is also possible that these bodies were disinterred for dissection,” Nystrom says. Similar to the findings in Albany, the Erie County Poorhouse cemetery has more dissected males than females, but this cemetery included a dissected juvenile skeleton as well. At both cemeteries, the number of individuals who had been dissected is about 5? 6%.Nystrom is quick to note that dissection, autopsy, and amputation are not always easy to distinguish from one another in archaeologically recovered human skeletons. Most of the evidence he found was in the form of craniotomies, or the removal of a portion of the skull, which is clear from cut marks. Some indications of postmortem trauma take the form of cutting long bones or vertebral elements. Long bone cuts may represent failed amputations, while craniotomies could be done in service of an autopsy rather than dissection. The difference is subtle but important.“Dissection was widely regarded as a violation of the body and was generally punitive in nature,” Nystrom says, because it “transformed the body into an object.” De la Cova adds that “to dismember the body conflicted with 19th century religious beliefs about resurrection in the afterlife. If one was dissected, this was tantamount to eternal purgatory, a fate no one, rich or poor, wished to succumb to.” Autopsies, on the other hand, “marked an individual as important enough to warrant an investigation of their death,” Nystrom explains. Dissection can therefore be evidence of structural violence, while autopsy generally would not be. For the skeletons that had few instances of postmortem cut marks, autopsy could be a viable explanation. Ten people from the Erie County Poorhouse that had evidence only of craniotomies, for example, may very well have been autopsied rather than dissected. “This is not to say,” Nystrom reiterates, “that these individuals did not suffer from structural violence in life, just that in these particular instances we cannot unequivocally extend this violence into death.”Bioarchaeologist Debra Martin of the University of Nevada Las Vegas, whose research deals with violence in the past, suggests that Nystrom’s work “gives insight into the ways that institutionalized violence and implementation of laws manifest in poor health and early death for vulnerable people” and that it highlights the “culturally?sanctioned ways that the uncared?for and unprotected dead are also subject to mistreatment.”Black Bodies Stolen And DissectedThe history of medicine in the U.S. was built on the bodies of the poor and the marginalized, particularly in the 18th and 19th centuries. But this social inequality in death extended into the early 20th century as well. “The historical data that is available on dissection in the late 19th and early 20th century America clearly indicates a bias toward African Americans,” De la Cova notes, “with more black bodies being anatomized than white bodies.”De la Cova works with three American anatomical collections comprised of people whose bodies were not claimed at death. All three collections, which are from Cleveland, St. Louis, and Washington D.C., include “poor Euro?Americans, immigrants, and African Americans who lived on the margins of society” and who were dissected, she says. The Euro?Americans were largely from hospitals for the indigent, although many Euro?American women were institutionalized for decades and were not claimed by family members after they died.A large segment of the African Americans that de la Cova studied were part of the Great Migration, black Southerners who moved far away from their homes and families to escape racial discrimination in the early 20th century. De la Cova has found that “African Americans who lived during this time period had significantly higher rates of skeletal tuberculosis than Euro? Americans. Not only does structural violence appear in the form of dissection,” she points out, “but it also is seen in regard to the actual skeletal health of these individuals” as blacks were marginalized into “poor neighborhoods with substandard, overpriced, and crowded tenement housing” where infectious disease can spread rapidly.Archaeologist James Davidson of the University of Florida studied a black cemetery from the turn of the 20th century in Dallas, Texas, and describes secret agreements between medical schools and local government officials for procuring dead bodies.Davidson writes that African Americans were a particularly marginalized group in the early20th century South, and “their bodies were used in disproportionate numbers to serve as cadavers for medical instruction.” At the time, medical science had created ‘evidence’ that African Americans were biologically inferior to Euro? Americans to justify social systems like slavery and segregation. “In the field of medicine,” Davidson says, “black bodies, despite these claims of inferiority, were often used as instructional materials to aid white doctors training to treat white patients.”     The Freedman’s Cemetery in Dallas, which was excavated in the 1990s, contained the remains of over 1,000 people, nearly all African American. It was a cemetery that grew out of the “Beautification of Death Movement,” an idea influenced by religious ideology but that became a larger social phenomenon, which contributed to larger and more expensive funerals. There was a “palpable fear in the black community of dying without the necessary funds to provide for a ‘proper funeral,’ and instead being reduced to a pauper or indigent’s grave—losing one’s identity and perhaps falling prey to the Resurrection Men,” Davidson writes.The burials at Freedman’s Cemetery reveal in their coffins and other accoutrements that African Americans in Dallas at the turn of the 20th century invested heavily in “proper funerals.” But the archaeology also reveals “unmistakable evidence of the illegal use of African American bodies as cadavers in medical dissections, robbing these persons of their identity as individuals, and of even the charade of ‘a decent and proper burial’,” Davidson concludes.A double?burial at the Freedman’s Cemetery– that of two adult men in their 40s–include clear evidence of dissection of the bodies, in the form of cut marks on the skulls and other bones. Unlike the evidence in the Erie County Poorhouse or Albany County Almshouse that Nystrom examined, the placement of the two men’s bodies in the coffin including “placing one man’s body on his back in the superior position, and then positioning the other’s body prone on his stomach, where his head (if present) would have been face down in the groin of the other dead man,” Davidson found. The missing head’s whereabouts are unknown, but Davidson suspects the skull went into a study collection or onto a physician’s desk.But similar to the finds at the Erie County Poorhouse Cemetery, the Freedman Cemetery had 16 graves that contained no skeletal remains but whose coffin lids had been seriously damaged. While Davidson also notes that bodies may have been dug up for legitimate reasons of moving the burials, grave robbing is an equally valid suggestion, and would have happened soon after death.Freedman Cemetery closed in 1907. Some of the exhumations may therefore represent the legal transfer of remains to a new cemetery. But considering there was a dramatic increase in medical student enrollment in Dallas in the same year, Davidson thinks that many of those empty boxes are the only tangible remains of 20th century graverobbing. The remains themselves, since they were procured through illegal activity, would not have been reburied where they were taken from and were likely unceremoniously dumped somewhere else in Dallas or cremated in the city’s trash incinerator, as dead animals were treated.American Medicine And Structural ViolenceWhile the medical profession has moved beyond antiquated but long?held ideas about race?based differences in human bodies, the legacy of structural violence is not gone from American culture. Beyond the practice of dissection, violence done historically to black bodies in service of medicine ranges from the Tuskegee syphilis experiment to the HeLa cell line taken from a black woman and commoditized. A history of distrust of the medical establishment “has profound implications for African American health,” Davidson says, and that today “African Americans are 60% less willing to consider whole body donation than whites of similar backgrounds.”Nystrom also notes that, historically, we can see inequality “embodied as health disparities in the living but also ‘disembodiment’ and the treatment and fate of the dead body.” His work does not directly address postmortem examination and structural violence in African American skeletal collections, but he writes that “given the deep history of direct and indirect violence perpetrated against people of African descent, this would be a useful perspective in which to interpret such evidence.” De la Cova agrees that “working with human skeletons allows us to see and visualize the impact that structural violence has on people. The flesh may not remain, but cultural activities and disease leave their marks on the bones and give us a window into the biological impact of discrimination.”While donated bodies make up the majority of dissections in the U.S. today, unclaimed bodies are still used in medical education. The ethics of this practice are often debated within medicine, but it is equally important within bioarchaeology. Nystrom concludes his study by writing that “we must remain cognizant, as good anthropologists, of our position within the very structure that we are trying to examine and acknowledge our potential contribution to the violence.”