DNA Analysis From Colonial Delaware Skeletons Reveals Beginning Of American Slave Trade58,303American slavery is commonly understood to have peaked in the late 18th century and was outlawed by the U.S. in the mid-19th century following the Civil War. The practice of slavery in the 17th century American colonies, however, is less well known. A new DNA study of skeletons from a farmstead on the Delaware frontier has revealed key information about the early transatlantic slave trade.The Avery’s Rest site in coastal Delaware was excavated by Daniel Griffith of the Archaeological Society of Delaware and the Delaware Division of Historical and Cultural Affairs over multiple years. Located near the 17th century frontier Dutch settlement of Whorekill, Avery’s Rest is one of the earliest colonial settlements known in Delaware. The 800-acre tract was owned by John and Sarah Avery, who passed down the land to their daughters. Today, the land is owned by Mr. and Mrs. Wayman Harmon, who allowed archaeological excavation to commence on the property.Archaeologists discovered several structures at Avery’s Rest, along with a fenced garden area, a well, a cellar, numerous artifacts, as well as 11 graves – 8 in a southern cluster and 3 in a northern one. Since very few well-preserved human skeletons have been found on 17th century Chesapeake Bay sites, the discovery of the Avery’s Rest cemetery is rather unique.Writing in the American Journal of Physical Anthropology, a research team led by Raquel Fleskes of the University of Pennsylvania details their osteological and mitochondrial DNA analysis of the 11 skeletons in an attempt to understand who they were and how they came to be buried in colonial Delaware.Nondestructive analysis of the bones was first done at the Smithsonian Institution by Douglas Owsley, Karin Bruwelheide, and Kathryn Barca, who showed that there were two children, two adult women, and seven adult men buried at Avery’s Rest. All of the adults showed evidence of spine or disk degeneration, suggesting it was hard physical work for anyone in the middling planter class to live on the colonial frontier. Four of the men also had tooth wear from long-term pipe use.While all of the people were buried in coffins according to Christian burial practices – supine, with an east-to-west orientation, and hands on the pelvis or along the sides – a close examination of the shape of the skulls showed that “eight individuals buried in the southern cluster had biological features indicative of European descent, whereas the three individuals in the northern cluster had features consistent with African ancestry,” the researchers discovered.In order to investigate this perceived biological difference more closely, Fleskes enlisted the help of ancient DNA experts Graciela Cabana and Frankie West from the University of Tennessee and Theodore Schurr from the University of Pennsylvania for further genetic analysis. They found through their mtDNA analysis that the osteological assessments were correct: the north cluster of burials were those of two men and one young child with African ancestry, while the south cluster included one infant, two women, and five men of European ancestry.“The presence of individuals of African descent at Avery’s Rest is significant,” the researchers write, because “in 1700, African persons represented only about 5% of the population in Delaware,” which was “not a primary destination for the transatlantic slave trade.” There were in fact fewer than 500 African or African-descended people living in Delaware prior to 1700.Comparing the mtDNA to a database of people with known origin did not allow the archaeologists to determine which European country the people in the south cluster came from. They did, however, find an uncommon DNA haplotype – previously reported only from the UK and Sweden – in four people, suggesting they were closely biologically related.The African DNA, on the other hand, was not similar among the three people, which indicates “that they are not related maternally and possibly originated in geographically dispersed populations in Africa,” the researchers suggest. This discovery is important, they note, because it “provides a glimpse into the geographic reach of the slave trade from Africa to colonial America.” The diversity of African genetics in 17th century Delaware “underscores the degree to which enslavement was an expansive, far-reaching process during this early period of colonial history,” they conclude.The lack of major shipping ports in Delaware at the time means that African individuals were likely purchased either through small-scale trading with the English colony of Barbados or through intermediaries in places like New Amsterdam (New York) and then transported south. The two men at Avery’s Rest with African ancestry may have come from West or Central Africa, while the child’s East African ancestry speaks to an even longer journey for the child or its mother.DNA results do not conclusively prove that the eight people with European ancestry are members of the Avery family. However, documentary evidence of the family suggests that, in this time period, John Avery, his son-in-law Hercules Shepheard, and his infant grandson John Shepheard all died and were presumably buried on the family homestead. The infant with European ancestry could be Avery’s grandson, while the two women may be matriarch Sarah Avery and one of her daughters.With the rise of tobacco as a cash crop in the Chesapeake and Mid-Atlantic regions of North America in the 17th century, the need for a large labor force resulted in an influx of indentured servants from Europe and then race-based slavery in the American colonies. Everyone at Avery’s Rest was engaged in physically demanding activities, but the differences between the African and European descended people are materially important, Fleskes tells me by email. “Although the close burial patterning and the shared markers of osteological stress are different than what is observed in later 18th and 19th century plantation sites,” she says, “relationships were still structured under the auspices of enslavement at Avery’s Rest.”Historical court records refer to two enslaved males living at Avery’s Rest, but they are not specifically named, only given a valuation as part of John Avery’s estate. Their lives and deaths are therefore only understood through the bioarchaeological analysis that Fleskes and her colleagues are doing. “The perimortem injury noted for one African descended male suggests a violent death,” the archaeologists note. Combined with additional evidence of childhood nutritional stress and a less formal method of burial, they suggest that there may have been lesser regard for this individual during his life.The history of colonial America is currently only partially known from documentary evidence, meaning the archaeology of the Mid-Atlantic region is particularly important. The findings from Fleskes and colleagues’ small study speak to the need for expanded funding for archaeological analysis in order to better understand the early stages and effects of the transatlantic slave trade.