London Crossrail Dig Hits Beheaded Romans6048Rows of skulls without jaws. A skeleton with its head between its shins. An old cooking pot full of cremains. As construction progresses on London’s Crossrail, a high?frequency commuter train line through the heart of the city, bodies are being found at every turn.In March as part of the Crossrail excavations, archaeologists found nearly 3,000 skeletons of people who died between 1569 and 1738 and were buried at the Bethlehem (Bedlam) Royal Hospital burial grounds, likely including victims of the Great Plague of London, a bubonic plague epidemic that swept London in 1665, killing about a quarter of its population. Once fully analyzed, the Bedlam skeletons will give bioarchaeologists a world of information about the lives and deaths of a vast cross?section of London’s population at the time.The Roman remains that archaeologists have just begun to excavate at the Liverpool station, though, are telling a different story than burial in a proper cemetery. Initially, skulls found in a small river channel were interpreted as wash?out from a Roman cemetery somewhere upstream. But the discovery last month of a reused cooking pot full of cremated human bones changed archaeologists’ minds.Lead archaeologist of the Crossrail dig, Jay Carver, now thinks there is a possibility these are beheading victims. The skulls are upside down, missing their lower jaws, and will be examined closely by bioarchaeologists for evidence of trauma or injury that could yield clues into how these individuals died. The suggestion that these may be the remains of Boudicca‘s rebels, who fought the occupying Romans in 60 AD, is one that archaeologists are taking seriously. Boudicca led nearly 100,000 troops in destroying Londinium and killed an estimated 70,000 Romans. Urban legend puts her grave at King’s Cross station, but archaeologists are unsure if they will ever find the body of the warrior queen.In the latest video posted yesterday by the Crossrail dig project, Carver also reveals an intact Roman?era burial that is different from the norm, with the skull detached and placed between the knees of the individual. He cautions against an immediate assumption of execution and beheading, though, noting that this form of burial “doesn’t always seem to be associated with punishment and a violent end” and that instead it “could be to do with religion at the time, making sure the individual doesn’t come back to engage with the living.”The Roman?era excavations at the Liverpool Crossrail station will continue for several weeks.Artifacts so far have included shackles, horseshoes, and pottery, and Carver anticipates further fascinating finds before the dig is over.