DNA Confirms Headless Roman?Era Gladiator Not From Britain ? And Maybe Not A Gladiator6188The “headless Romans” from Eboracum (modern York in England) made a splash when forensic analysis of the graveyard was first announced in 2010. Excavated between 2004?2005, the cemetery contained around 100 individuals, almost all of whom were male. This odd graveyard held more intrigue, though: many of the skeletons were decapitated, showed evidence of puncture wounds from animals, and had lopsided musculature. All of this was suggestive of their employment as gladiators. As the Roman Empire’s northernmost provincialcapital, Eboracum flourished around 200 AD. But researchers have long wondered howcosmopolitan this remote outpost was.In 2011, research led by Gundula Müldner of the University of Reading sought to use multiple isotopes to characterize the homelands and diet of two dozen of the so?called headless gladiators. Published in the Journal of Archaeological Science, this study found that these unusually buried individuals had dramatically different isotope values than did other skeletons from Roman Britain. It appears from the strontium and oxygen isotope data that men from different regions of the Empire were buried together, and from the carbon and nitrogen data that many had diets that were at odds with Britain but fit in better with more Mediterranean foods.A subset of the people studied by Müldner and colleagues were selected for DNA analysis to further interrogate their genetic homelands. That paper, by Rui Martiniano of Trinity College Dublin and colleagues, came out today in Nature Communications. Using seven of the “gladiators” from York, as well as one earlier Iron Age skeleton and one later Anglo?Saxon skeleton, Martiniano and colleagues delved into the genomes to find out more about these people’s appearances, blood types, and homelands.Six of the seven gladiators showed “affinity with modern British Celtic populations,” they write, “particularly Welsh, but significantly diverge from populations from Yorkshire and other eastern English samples.” Further, these six Romano?British skeletons are similar to the Iron Age individual but different from the Anglo? Saxon person. This suggests population continuity from the earlier Iron Age period to the Roman period, which is not terribly surprising given the fact that Eboracum was about as far from Rome as you could get in the Empire.The researchers also tried to predict the individuals’ appearances and blood type based on their genomes. Unsurprisingly, most had brown eyes and brown hair, but two of the samples – the one Anglo?Saxon and one of the Romano? British people – likely had blonde hair and blue eyes. They further found that O was the most common blood type in the Roman period samples, but the later Anglo?Saxon was either A or B. Two of the Roman burials and the Iron Age burial were also lactase persistent, meaning they could digest milk into adulthood, while two of the Romano?British people may have been lactose intolerant.The most interesting individual to come from the Martiniano et al. study is numbered 3DRIF?26.This man lacks the lactase persistence trait, but his DNA and his isotopes also revealed he was most likely an immigrant to Eboracum. Based on DNA, the researchers think “that the origins and childhood of individual 3DRIF?26 lay far outside Britain.” Co?author Daniel Bradley of Trinity College Dublin told National Geographic that “the nearest genetic matches are from Palestine or Saudi Arabia. He definitely didn’t come from Europe.”Although the Driffield cemetery from Eboracum has been called a “gladiator” burial, Martiniano and colleagues aren’t settled on that interpretation. They note that, although Driffield is similar in composition to another “gladiator” cemetery in Ephesus, “the evidence [at Driffield] could also fit with a military context; the Roman army had a minimum height for recruitment, and fallen soldiers would match the young adult profile of the cemetery. In this later Roman period, increasingly large numbers of soldiers were enlisted locally.” There is no evidence that I know of, however, that decapitation was routine for Roman soldiers nor that they would have been subjected to bites from large carnivores.      The “headless Romans” from Eboracum are certainly enigmatic, but the combination of DNA and isotopic analysis may eventually make the skeletons yield all their secrets.