Earliest Case Of Leprosy In Britain Reveals Scandinavian Origins Of The Disease6517Leprosy is often associated with the High and Late Middle Ages in Europe, a time when you were likely to run across disfigured people begging in the streets. Woodcuttings, historical records, and archaeological skeletons attest to the prevalence of leprosy in this time period, but the roots of leprosy on the continent are much earlier. A group of researchers from the Netherlands and the UK recently found the earliest evidence of leprosy in Britain in the skeletal remains of an Anglo?Saxon. Even more exciting is their discovery that this man introduced leprosy into the country from Scandinavia.Rescue archaeology over half a century ago in Greater Chesterford, a cemetery site near an ancient Roman town, produced a skeleton carbon?dated to the 5th?6th centuries AD. Co?author Sonia Zakrzewski told me that the University of Southampton recently received the skeleton from English Heritage (now called Historic England), where the bones had been in storage since excavation. The person in this particular grave, a young male based on features of the skull andpelvis, was buried with his legs bent and his arms placed over his left shoulder. An old archaeological report showed a number of grave goods accompanied him into the afterlife: a spear rested near his head, and the knife at his hip may have been secured there by a belt with an oval buckle. But the bones themselves had been separated over the decades, and Zakrzewski and bioarchaeologist Sarah Inskip had to put the pieces of the skeleton back together. When they did, they discovered that a disease was plaguing the man: leprosy.The man’s foot bones appeared eaten away. Destruction of the thin, tube?like bones of the feet is a common finding in leprosy, as are the lesions on his lower legs. Unfortunately, without the bones of his face, which can display facies leprosa or the characteristic facial destruction of leprosy, Inskip and colleagues could not be sure that this Anglo?Saxon man suffered from the disease. The researchers decided to undertake ancient DNA (aDNA) analysis of the bones to see if they could find clear evidence of Mycobacterium leprae, the bacillus that causes leprosy, and to see if they could identify the particular strain and where it came from. While aDNA analyses have been done on Medieval?era skeletons to find evidence of leprosy, no previous study had attempted to use genetic analysis on a British skeleton this old.Leaving no bone unturned, Inskip led the research team in testing small amounts of bone from a metatarsal, talus, calcaneus, and both fibulae for the presence of M. leprae DNA. Not only did they find that this Anglo?Saxon man suffered from leprosy, but they also were able to determine the specific strain he had. Leprosy strain 3I has been isolated in skeletons from Medieval Britain, Denmark, and Sweden. It is also the strain most commonly found at the present in the southern US, where it is often transmitted to humans by armadillos. The 3I strain was brought into the US by early European settlers, but based on Inskip and colleagues’ research, it was originally brought into Britain from Scandinavia.Backing up this interpretation are isotope results from this Anglo?Saxon man’s second molar. Because teeth form once and do not remodel, they are like time capsules, preserving chemical information about what a person consumed while the teeth were forming. Chemical signatures of strontium and oxygen, two elements we incorporate into our bodies when we eat and drink, can reveal where a person grew up because different geographic locations have different isotope ratios. The isotope analysis showed that the man was almost certainly not from Britain, and his teeth suggest he may have been from Denmark or Germany. Migrating from northern Europe into England at some point after childhood, this man brought a new strain of leprosy with him.“It is like a bioarchaeologist’s dream,” Gwen Robbins Schug, a bioarchaeologist at Appalachian State University who was not involved in this research, said of the project. “The combined effect of all these data is remarkable new insights into the origin, migration, and evolution of this disease.” Robbins Schug has worked on leprosy in ancient India, where “poor preservation means many of these biochemical analyses are not fruitful.” The research that Inskip and colleagues present in their PLoS paper “truly sets a high bar for this type of research in Europe,” Robbins Schug told me.The Greater Chesterford cemetery has not given up all its secrets yet. Zakrzewski and Inskip are working with Simon Mays, Stephanie Evelyn?Wright, and Joanna Sofaer to probe the burials further because “juveniles and people with apparently visible disease (leprosy, tuberculosis, spinal disorders) seem to have been buried in clusters in the cemetery.” As detailed in a presentation at the American Association of Physical Anthropologists meeting in April titled “Anglo?Saxon Concepts of Dis/Ability,” the team wants to find out if “impairment affected their behavior in some performative way.” At the Greater Chesterford site, being able to perform masculine duties, like riding a horse and carrying weapons, was key to men’s social standing. Did debilitating leprosy complicate this individual’s ability to be a man? Or was his burial along with other impaired people a signifier of inclusion into a different group? This groundbreaking work in progress promises exciting information into gender and disability in the Anglo?Saxon past.