Christian Cemetery From Viking Age Iceland Reveals Strenuous Lives And Early Deaths6600Legend has it that a Viking from the Faroe Islands discovered Iceland around 825 AD. More settlers quickly followed, mostly the Norse who worshipped the Aesir, or gods like Thor and Odin. When Iceland adopted Christianity in 1000 AD by decree of the National Assembly, first the political elite and then the rest of the populace gave up their pagan customs. This change is seen clearly in Icelandic burial customs, which go from single graves made along farm boundaries to concentrated burials around a church. And new research on skeletons from these transitional cemeteries is revealing just how harsh an environment these early Icelanders had to deal with.Bioarchaeologists Gu?n? Zoëga and Kimmarie Murphy write about life on the edge of the Arctic in their recent research article in the International Journal of Osteoarchaeology. Their analysis focuses on a small cemetery associated with a farm called Keldudalur in the Skagafjör?ur region of northern Iceland. Dating to the early 11th century, Keldudalur has 52 burials over the course of a century, likely three to five generations of one farming family.Early Icelanders, like their Norse forebears, were pastoral farmers, planting grain but also relying on sheep and cattle to get them through difficult times. With the advent of Christianity in the country, farm churches sprang up along with enclosed cemeteries. For bioarchaeologists, this change means better preservation of skeletons, as pagan burials tend to be spread out and shallow. The cemetery at Keldudalur is about average in size for this time period, but Zoëga and Murphy wanted to know if the health of this family was better or worse than comparable cemeteries, such as Hrísbrú, which showed high levels of violence and disease.The Keldudalur cemetery yielded 27 adults; the men were buried in the southern half while the women were buried in the northern section. The remaining 26 skeletons were of kids; 16 of these were under a year old when they died. Infant mortality at Keldudalur, as in many pre?modern cemeteries, was high, but Zoëga and Murphy write that “if an individual survived childhood, death was more likely to occur after 30 years of age.”It is not always easy to figure out what kids died from in the past, as common diseases like diarrheal conditions can turn deadly fast and do not leave marks on bone. Zoëga and Murphy found a high frequency of porotic hyperostosis, a condition that results from anemia and typically shows up as holes in the cranium. Since these Icelanders were eating a lot of meat, their anemia was unlikely caused by iron?deficiency anemia; rather, they may have had other gastrointestinal infections or dietary deficiencies. One child even shows a pattern of porous bone suggesting he or she had scurvy.Among the adults, degenerative joint disease was common, likely the result of the rigorous farming environment. Men and women were equally affected by joint disease, meaning everyone pitched in on this small family farm. Older people had more instances of joint disease, but since arthritis is a progressive condition, this is unsurprising.Typically, older individuals will also have more dental cavities, as enamel is destroyed over time by chewing and by the action of bacteria. But dental cavities were non?existent at Keldudalur. Zoëga and Murphy think this may be due to the high amounts of dairy in the diet, which can protect teeth from cavities. Before you trade your toothbrush for a hunk of cheese, though, excessive dairy consumption can lead to gingivitis, plaque, and infections and tooth loss. The adults from Keldudalur had these in spades.Bioarchaeologist Cecilia Collins, who has worked with Icelandic cemeteries but was not affiliated with this study, told me that the Keldudalur research is “another important piece in understanding the lives of families and communities on the edge of the Arctic, and goes a step further in diminishing the stereotype of the marauding and violent Vikings.” What the Icelandic sagas and other historical accounts leave out is information on the daily lives of these subsistence farmers. “It’s fascinating,” Collins continues, “to imagine this place in transition from pagan faith to accepting Christianity, even to the point of reburying the remains of pagans in the church cemetery.”The people buried at Keldudalur faced “risks of seasonal unpredictability,” write Zoëga and Murphy, along with “food shortages, exposure to pathogens, and strenuous activities.” From the adults’ joint disease to the infants’ deaths, Keldudalur was “a population living and adapting to a harsh and periodically resource scarce subarctic environment.” This well? preserved skeletal collection will likely be studied for years to come, and researchers will find out more about early Christians in northern Iceland.