Mysteries Of The Black Death, Shroud Of Turin, And Origins of Early Americans Solved With DNA6969While ancient DNA studies have been increasing in recent years with the advent of NextGen sequencing techniques and methods for removing modern contamination, this past week has brought incredible news that highlights the range of applications of aDNA in solving historical questions. From the first evidence of the Black Death to the continued controversy over the authenticity of the Shroud of Turin to the hypothesis that people migrated through Beringia to get to the Americas for the first time, aDNA studies published this month hold both new answers and enormous potential for archaeology.Was the Black Death an unfortunate mutation?The bacterium that caused the Black Death – Yersinia pestis – is actually a genetically mutated version that allowed it to reside in the guts of fleas. The disease was spread through fleas and rats in Medieval Europe, resulting in nearly half the population succumbing to bubonic plague in the 14th century. In an article published a week ago in the journal Cell, researchers traced back the evolutionary lineage of Y. pestis by studying the skeletons of 101 people from the Bronze Age. They found evidence of the bacterium in seven adults. Even more importantly, one of those people died over 5,700 years ago. The oldest previous evidence of Y. pestis in skeletons comes from someone who died just 1,500 years ago. Many of the pandemics discussed in historical records might therefore be attributable to Y. pestis.Interestingly, when the researchers looked more closely at the Y. pestis genomes, they noticed the absence of two genetic components that are present in more contemporary samples of the bacterium. One of the mutations in the Medieval and modern Y. pestis genomes allows the bacterium to multiply in the flea’s guts without being destroyed, causing the flea to bite anything it can; while the other mutation lets Y. pestis spread across different tissues, meaning an infection in the lungs can spread to the blood and lymphatic systems.What this means is that these Bronze Age strains of the plague could not have been carried by fleas and could not have caused the bubonic form of the plague that was particularly deadly in Medieval Europe. The mechanism of transmission in the Bronze Age was instead human?to?human transmission, much like the way tuberculosis is spread.Co?author Robert Foley said in a press release that “the endemic nature of pneumonic plague was perhaps more adapted for an earlier Bronze Age population. Then, as Eurasian societies grew in complexity and trading routes continued to open up, maybe the conditions started to favor the more lethal form of plague. The Bronze Age is the edge of history, and ancient DNA is making what happened at this critical time more visible.” Another co?author, Eske Willerslev, added that “these results show that the ancient DNA has the potential not only to map our history and prehistory, but also discover how disease may have shaped it.”     Discovering the Origins of the First AmericansYesterday, a group of researchers headed by Justin Tackney published a paper in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences on ancient DNA analysis from two infant burials in Alaska that date back at least 11,500 years. Archaeologists have long known from stone tools and other remains that one or more waves of migrants crossed the dry Bering Strait between modern?day Russia and Alaska many millennia ago, working their way south into Canada, the US, and Central and South America. While the scale and number of migrations is still not entirely clear, as there would appear to have been numerous migration events over the years, Beringia — which refers to the entire area on either side of the Strait — is becoming a key geographical area in the search for answers about Homo sapiens’ migration into the New World.One of the main barriers to answering questions about early human migrations in this area is in finding human skeletal remains from the correct time period that have been well preserved.Tackney and colleagues got permission from the Healy Lake Tribal Council and the Tanana Chiefs Conference to do genetic testing on two burials — an infant who was just a few weeks old and a pre? term fetus — from the site of Upward Sun River in Alaska. They also attempted to test a 3?year? old who had been cremated, but DNA did not survive from that burial.Mitochondrial DNA gave the team their first surprise: the infants were not maternally related, as was assumed based on the burial. Their DNA haplotypes, or maternal lineages, are very rare in northern North America. Coupled with the fact that these genetic markers are found far north at a very early date, Tackney and colleagues believe this supports the Beringian Standstill Hypothesis, which says that once people crossed over to Alaska, they stayed there for a while before migrating south. Since these two individuals are the farthest north skeletons ever discovered, their dates of death and particular mitochondrial DNA sequences add considerably to a currently very small data set of ancient DNA from the earliest settlers of Beringia.   Problems with Authenticating the Shroud of TurinThe Shroud of Turin is famous for claims that it is the burial shroud of Jesus, revealing his visage in dirt, grime, and blood as it was wrapped around him. The shroud has a long and storied history, supposedly taken from Judea around 33 AD, moved to Constantinople, then to Athens, and finally to a small town in France in the 14th century, when its existence was officially recorded. Carbon 14 dating done in the 1980s settled the question of authenticity for many scholars when it dated the fabric to the 13th?14th centuries AD. But what if Medieval clergy “fixed” an old, falling?apart garment with new material in the Middle Ages? These sorts of questions make many think that the shroud could indeed be real.In a new article in Scientific Reports, lead author Gianni Barcaccia, a geneticist at the University of Padua in Italy, and his team report on their sequencing of DNA from the dust that they were allowed to vacuum from the shroud. They found plant DNA from various corners of the world, including spruce from Europe, clover from the Mediterranean, black locust trees from North America, and pear trees from East Asia.Barcaccia and his team also isolated human mitochondrial DNA. The haplotypes they found also suggest that people from all over the world had access to the shroud, with genetic information consistent with residents of China and north Africa, in addition to Europe. But most of the mtDNA information comes from the Middle East and the area around the Caucasus Mountains, fitting with the idea that the shroud toured the Old World before ending up in France in the Middle Ages. Even more interesting is the finding of DNA consistent with people from India; perhaps the material that made up the shroud was manufactured in India?Of course, since the shroud has been recognized since the Middle Ages as a possible religious relic, it has been handled and moved about for centuries. There is unfortunately nothing in the new research to suggest a Medieval origin for the shroud and subsequent handling by people over the centuries is unreasonable. The question of whether the shroud is indeed a 1st century AD artifact or a Medieval artifact is not solved by the new analysis.The question of the origin of the Shroud of Turin may yet be solved in our lifetimes, particularly as DNA analysis is getting more reliable, faster, less expensive, and less destructive. But I suspect that there will always be believers on both sides of the authentication argument, no matter what the results show.Ancient DNA is obviously not the skeleton key that can unlock all the mysteries of history... yet.As these three stories from this week’s news show, though, the rate at which DNA analyses are making headway in solving historical problems is staggering. As an archaeologist myself, I look forward to being able to apply these new techniques to my own research soon.