Archaeological Skeletons From London Prove Some Romans Were Lead Poisoned70199Whether the ancient Romans’ copious use of the metal in their civilization resulted in lead poisoning has been debated by classics scholars for centuries. New archaeological research on skeletons from Roman-era London has proven that many of these people were exposed to toxically high levels of lead.Writing in the journal Archaeometry, lead author Sean Scott of the University of Wisconsin-Madison along with an international team composed of Martin Shafer, Kate Smith, Joel Overdier, Barry Cunliffe, Thomas Stafford, and Philip Farrell detail their novel method for identifying lead (Pb) levels from ancient skeletons and the results they obtained.Working with the Museum of London, the researchers sourced samples from 30 thigh bones of people who lived during the 1st to 3rd centuries AD, the peak of urban development in the Roman Empire, when the settlement of Londinium was created. As a control sample, they also sourced 70 bones from four cemeteries dating to the earlier Iron Age. For all of the skeletons, the research team measured strontium and lead isotopes as well as a range of trace elements, including lead concentration.Scott and colleagues discovered that the Roman-era bones, even when corrected for concentrations of lead in the burial soil, ranged from 8 to 123 micrograms of lead per gram, with a median of 26.5. These numbers are far greater than those from the earlier Iron Age, which they found to range from 0.3 to 2.9 micrograms per gram. In short, only a couple of the Iron Age burials exceed 0.5 micrograms, and all had lower lead concentrations than the Roman-era skeletons did. Given the researchers’ chemical assessment protocol, a lack of lead grave goods that could have contaminated the skeletons over the last two millennia, and the absence of lead coffins, it is highly likely that the measured lead content of the bones was not influenced by the burial environment.It is well known that the Romans used lead for a variety of reasons: weaponry, aqueduct pipes, jewelry, and even sapa or defrutum, which was lead sugar precipitated out of pewter vessels and used as a sweetener. And so for decades, researchers interested in the classical world have asked whether large-scale lead poisoning caused emperors to go mad, populations to decline due to infertility, and the Roman Empire to collapse.Scott and colleagues address these questions head-on with their data from Roman London. According to the U.S. National Institute for Occupational Health and Safety, they note, blood toxicity can occur at a level of 5 micrograms of lead per deciliter in adults, with a reading of 40 micrograms per deciliter being considered very high.“Our femur-based blood Pb calculations indicate that the majority of the Londinium Romans would have had blood Pb levels exceeding 5 micrograms/deciliter,” Scott and colleagues write. With an average of 14.4 micrograms/deciliter in the bones whose lead levels they measured, the researchers say that “our data suggest that clinically significant blood Pb levels reflecting chronic exposures were very common.” The 70-fold greater lead levels in Roman-era London make it clear that lead pollution was a problem for more than half of the population.If these data are reflective of an entire population with chronically elevated blood lead levels, the health implications are important for our understanding of the Roman Empire. Scott and colleagues note that elevated lead levels in adults can lead to hypertension, kidney issues, reduced and abnormal sperm, and miscarriages and stillbirths. “The effect of Pb exposure in reducing fertility has societal impact,” the researchers write, “and could very well have contributed to population declines in Roman communities” such as London.These data correlate well with a 2010 study headed by Janet Montgomery of Durham University, on which I was a coauthor. We found from studying dental enamel that levels of lead changed dramatically over time in Britain, and also that there was a wide range of lead levels in 1st-4th century AD Rome. Our analysis only included a handful of people who lived in Rome itself, though, and I asked Scott whether his work could be extended to better understand the health of the population living in the Imperial capital.Scott told me by email that “it is hard to say whether or not levels would have been similar in Rome” because high levels of lead in ancient London may have been due to the abundance of lead resources in Britain. “There seems to be some evidence that the Romans invaded Britain specifically for the metal resources there,” he notes. However, in integrating his team’s skeletal lead data with the tooth enamel data that my colleagues and I produced and with published peat bog core data, Scott says that there is clear evidence of increased atmospheric lead concentrations all over Europe. “Maybe it didn’t really matter where you lived,” he says; “the widespread atmospheric lead pollution could get you anywhere!”The team hopes to be able to extend their methodology to study more skeletons in the future, from other parts of the Roman Empire. Specifically, Scott tells me he’s interested in figuring out whether there was more lead exposure in rural or in urban communities, and whether it is possible to see lead exposure in multiple generations of families buried in the same cemetery. “Doing similar studies to what we have done in other large Roman settlements could keep one busy for a long time!” he concludes.While the question of the effects of lead poisoning on the Roman Empire is far from settled, Scott and colleagues’ research adds to the growing body of scientific data drawn from multiple sources that show human-created lead pollution was a serious problem two thousand years ago.