Plague Genome Sequenced From 6th Century Woman's Teeth7587A 6th century skeleton found in Germany has yielded new information about the genome of Yersinia pestis, the bacterium that caused plagues for centuries in Europe and Asia. The woman’s teeth provide evidence that the Plague of Justinian reached even out-of-the-way places not known from historical records to have been affected by this disease.At the site of Altenerding near Aschheim, Germany, a Bavarian cemetery dating to the 6th century was uncovered. Grave goods found with the bodies suggest burial around 530-570 AD, when Justinian ruled the eastern Roman Empire. During the second half of the 6th century, the plague hit Europe in at least three waves. Although plague is not historically known from this area of southern Germany, these bodies have revealed genetic evidence of it.Teeth from 20 skeletons in double-burials were tested for Y. pestis. Only one person — a female found in a double burial with a male — provided enough copies for researchers to capture the bacterium’s genome. Writing this week in Molecular Biology & Evolution, Michal Feldman and colleagues reveal the high- coverage genome from this Justinianic plague victim.Feldman and colleagues discovered that the ”Justinianic strain” of the plague “was more genetically divergent than previously suggested.” That is, this 6th century strain is more divergent from the 14th and 19th century plagues in Europe and China than those latter two are from one another. “This observation is counterintuitive,” they write, “as ancient lineages should have fewer substitutions than their modern counterparts since they have had less time to accumulate genetic changes.”The researchers also compared the genome from Altenerding to one sequenced previously from Aschheim nearby, which dates to the first half of the 6th century AD. Although there were some problems with the Aschheim sequence, by and large the genomes matched up, suggesting the same bacterium and the same strain were responsible for deaths at both the Altenerding and the Aschheim cemeteries. “Our findings,” Feldman and colleagues note, “point to a low genetic diversity of the bacterium in this rural region of southern Germany during the 6th century.”More information is needed, however, on the extent and spread of the earliest plague pandemic. Additional skeletons dated to the time period may eventually yield data on the path of the disease and its rate of transmission. And knowing the rate of transmission might very well solve the question of why the 6th century Justinianic plague strain is so divergent.Feldman and colleagues conclude by noting that “exhaustive sampling of ancient material from suspected plague foci of various periods and geographical locations is needed to increase availability of high-quality data-sets and to deepen our understanding of the disease, its evolution, and its human impact.”