World's Oldest Cold Case: A 430,000?Year? Old Murder Victim Found In Pit Of Bones7620The skull is found in a cave, covered in red clay. A lone wisdom tooth remains, erupted and with only slight wear; the individual was a young adult. Although the skull was shattered into dozens of pieces, two depression fractures are clearly evident, the result of blunt force trauma to the head at the time of death. Evidence of homicide builds. But this was not a recent event, as the skull in question dates to 430,000 years ago. It is the world’s first murder, discovered at Sima de los Huesos, or the “Pit of Bones” in the Atapuerca Mountains of Spain.Writing today in the journal PLOS One, Nohemi Sala and colleagues lay out their evidence for this Middle Pleistocene cold case. If this were a modern murder trial, a jury might hear the following evidence.The skull in question, Cr?17, is from a young adult. In spite of the fact that it is broken, it is relatively complete, including the face, part of the upper jaw, and most of the cranial vault.Researchers also 3D scanned and reconstructed it to enable further study of the perimortem and postmortem fractures, or those that happened around the time of death and after death.Postmortem fractures were numerous, probably the result of soil pressing against the skull over thousands of years. These are easily distinguished from injuries that happened before and around the time of death. Fractures that occur at right angles or those that have jagged edges are postmortem in nature. Fresh bone simply does not break in that way.Two perimortem injuries were found, and both appear to be blunt force traumas. These injuries are located above the left eye orbit and affect both the inner and outer layers of the skull bones. Both have distinct notches along the fracture, and both have evidence of radiating fracture lines that connect the injuries. As force is applied to a bone, small cracks or fissures often radiate out from the main point of impact. There are no signs that either of these fractures had started to heal at the time of death, and no signs that predators feasted on the body or that geological events caused the identically?shaped injuries.A modern jury might also want to know how this person was killed, and Sala and colleagues have an answer. They write that “the dimensions and contours of the two depression fractures were found to be almost indistinguishable, strongly suggesting that both fractures were caused by the same object” swung at different trajectories. This is not a case of accidental injury, as “unintentional trauma typically affects the sides of the cranial vault, while intentional injuries are more commonly found in the facial region.” This type of cranial depression fracture, the researchers say, is “more likely to be the result of interpersonal violence.” Someone took a swing–or rather, two swings–at this person. The fact that the injuries are above the left eye could mean a right?handed assailant attacked this individual face?to? face. “This represents the earliest clear case of deliberate, lethal interpersonal aggression in the hominin fossil record, demonstrating that this is an ancient human behavior,” Sala and colleagues write.The Middle Pleistocene is a fascinating time in human evolution, as it is when our species, Homo sapiens, first appears in the fossil record. But some palaeoanthropologists make a distinction between these early forms and us–anatomically modern humans. Add to that the fact that Neandertals were also active in Europe around this time, and you get a melting pot of hominins. The Sima de los Huesos site boasts thousands of bone fragments that are revolutionizing our understanding of this key time period in both our physical evolution and our cultural evolution.“I find this completely compelling,” bioarchaeologist Debra Martin, an expert on ancient violence who was not affiliated with this study, told me in email. “Violence is a social behavior that has been with us for a very long time,” she said, pointing to Mesolithic studies such as the so?called head burials from Ofnet cave in Germany. “It is culturally mediated and has been with us as long as culture itself has been with us.”But how did this murder victim come to rest in the Sima de los Huesos cave site? “The individual represented by Cr?17 was already dead before their arrival at the site, and it is possible to rule out an accidental fall,” Sala and colleagues write. ”The only possible manner by which a deceased individual could have arrived at the Sima de los Huesos site is if its cadaver were dropped down the shaft.”A Pleistocene murder most foul, covered up by a body dump. Unfortunately, some things have not changed in 430,000 years.