Archaeologists Find Case Of Dwarfism In 3rd Millennium BC China8819A human skeleton discovered in the Chinese province of Henan is providing new information on the identification of dwarfism in the archaeological record as well as on disability and difference in the Neolithic period three millennia ago.The skeleton was found at the site of Guanjia along the Yellow River in east-central China during an excavation undertaken by the Henan Provincial Institute of Cultural Relics and Archaeology. Carbon dating of bones from the cemetery at the site shows that the people lived during the Yangshao period between 3300-2900 BC.Burials at Guanjia were simple earthen pits with very few artifacts included. The grave of skeleton M53 fit this tradition except in one way: their hands were placed behind the back, different from all other burials at the site. The young adult was also different in size: a small skull and short limb bones suggested a form of dwarfism.Writing in a forthcoming article in the International Journal of Paleopathology, archaeologists Siân Halcrow, Melanie Miller, and Anne Marie Snoddy from the University of Otago along with Wenquan Fan of the Henan Provincial Institute of Cultural Relics & Archaeology and Kate Pechenkina of Queens College detail their assessment of M53’s skeletal condition and the social implications it may have had.The catch-all medical term skeletal dysplasia — also known as dwarfism — refers to a range of genetic and medical conditions that result in much shorter-than-average stature in adults. Achondroplasia is the most common type of dwarfism in human, resulting in most cases from a genetic mutation that produces shorter arms and legs in relation to the head and trunk. Another type is proportionate dwarfism, in which the entire body is smaller than average, typically due to metabolic or hormonal imbalances. Cases of proportionate short stature are, however, extremely rare in both living populations and archaeological ones.In analyzing the case of M53, Halcrow and colleagues found that, although tooth eruption showed this person was an adult, their limb bones were fully grown but still unfused, a typical characteristic of people with endocrine-related growth disorders. Poor preservation of the pelvis ruled out a solid sex estimation, and the skull was indeterminate as well. The person’s arm bones, however, measured significantly shorter than the average from either males or females from Neolithic China.Creating a differential diagnosis, the researchers ruled out causes for M53’s growth disorder, including malnourishment, achondroplasia, and castration. Rather, they suggest that “pediatric onset hypopituitarism and hypothyroidism are the two most likely causes of the proportional short stature” of M53, related to a deficiency in either the thyroid gland or the pituitary gland that began in childhood.Hypothyroidism is actually known to be more common in China today than in the U.S., due to people living in iodine-deficient areas. While parts of the U.S. used to suffer endemic iodine deficiency, the iodization of salt in the 1920s greatly alleviated this issue; iodization in China began 15 years ago.Michael B.C. Rivera, a bioarchaeologist and host of the Arch & Anth Podcast, tells me that he finds this study to be an important contribution to the literature because the “probable links between iodine deficiency and abnormal skeletal growth in the context of ancient central China are valuable insights for us working on ancient health.” But he finds the social implications interesting as well, noting the importance of bioarchaeological work into “understanding human experiences of disability and possible marginalization in the past.”Halcrow and colleagues consider the potential effects of M53’s skeletal dysplasia on their life. Hypothyroidism can lead to mental impairment, as well as cardiac dysfunction and depression, as well as to death. Hypopituitarism can also cause mental impairment, paralysis, and respiratory issues. It is difficult, though, to be specific about the level of care that M53 needed during their life, the researchers note.“What we can say is that this individual would have likely had extra care needs where support from other community members was needed,” they write, “possibly both as the result of physical and/or mental disability, and that these would have presented early in life or were apparent at birth.”Historical information from the 4th-2nd centuries BC shows that dwarfism was not viewed negatively in Confucianism, but the philosopher Zhuangzi who wrote the foundational text of Taoism suggests that people with dwarfism were seen as outsiders to the community. M53 was treated somewhat differently in death, with their hands behind their back, but it is unclear how the people in Neolithic China may have viewed this person.“I think it is important for us to recognize that disability and difference can be found in the past, but these did not necessarily have negative connotations socially or culturally,” lead author Siân Halcrow concludes by telling me. “The ancient historical texts show that they may, in fact, have been revered in some situations.”